"You have confused the true and the real.'
GEORGE STANLEY conversation
Contents
The Recombinant City: A Foreword by William Gibson xi
I Prism, Mirror, Lens 1
II The Ruins of Morning 55
III House of the Ax 109
IV In Time of Plague 281
V Creatures of Light and Darkness 385
VI Palimpsest 503
VII The Anathemata: a plague journal 651
Prism, Mirror, Lens
to wound the autumnal city.
So howled out for the world to give him a name.
The in-dark answered with wind.
All you know 1 know: careening astronauts and bank clerks glancing
at the clock before lunch; accuses cowling at light-ringed mirror.; and
freight elevator operator.; grinding a thumb full of grease on a steel handle; student riots; know that dark women in bodegas shook their heads
last week because in six months prices have risen outlandishly; how coffee tastes after you've held it in your mouth, cold, a whole minute.
A whole minute he squatted, pebbles clutched with his left foot (the
baJe one), listening to his breath sound tumble down the ledges.
Beyond a leafy arras, reflected moonlight flittered.
He rubbed his palms against denim. Where he was, was still. Somewhere else, wind whined.
The leaves winked.
What had been wind was a motion in brush below. His hand went
to the rock behind.
She stood up, two dozen feet down and away. wearing only shadows the moon dropped from the viney maple; moved, and ,the shadows
moved on her.
1
2 Dhalgren
Fear prickled one side where his shirt (two middle buttons gone)
bellied with a breeze. Muscle made a band down the back of his jaw.
Black hair tried to paw off what fear scored on his forehead
She whispered something that was aU breath, and the wind came
for the words and dusted away the meaning:
"Ahhhh ... " from her.
He forced out air: it was nearly a cough.
" ... Hhhhh ... ' from her again. And laughter; which had a dozen
edges in it, a bright snarl under the moon. " ... hhhHHhhhb ... " which
had more sound in it than that, perhaps was his name, even. But the
wind, wind ...
She stepped.
Motion rearranged the shadows, baring one breast. There was a
lozenge of light over one eye. Call and ankle were luminous before
leaves.
Down her lower leg was a scratch.
His hair tugged back from his forehead. He watched hers flung forward. She moved with her hair, stepping over leaves, toes spread on
stone, in a tip-toe pause, to quit the darker shadows.
Crouched on rock, he pulled his hands up his thighs.
His hands were hideous.
She passed another, neater tree. The moon flung gold coins at her
breasts. Her brown aureoles were wide, her nipples small. ·You ... ?"
She said that, three feet away, looking down; and he still could
not make out her expression for the leaf dappling; but her cheek bones
were Orientally high. She was Oriental, he realized and waited for another word, tuned for accent. (He could sort from Japanese.)
"You've come!" It was a musical Midwestern Standard. "I didn't know
if you'd come!" Her voicing (a clear soprano, whispering ... ) said that
some of what he'd thought was shadow-movement might have been
fear: "You're here!" She dropped to her knees in a roar of foliage. Her
thighs, hard in front, softer (he could ten) on the sides-a column of
darkness between them-were inches from his raveled knees.
She reached, two fingers extended, pushed back plaid wool, and
touched his chest; ran her fingers down. He could hear his own crisp
hair.
laughter raised her face to the moon. He leaned forward; the odor
of lemons filled the breezeless gap. Her round face was compelling, her
eyebrows un-Orientally heavy. He judged her over thirty, but the only
lines were two small ones about her mouth.

Prism. Mirror. Lens 3

He turned his mouth, open, to hers, and raised his hands to the
sides of her head till her hair covered them. The cartilages of her ears
were hot curves on his palms. Her knees slipped in leaves; that made
her blink and laugh again. Her breath was like noon and smelled of
lemons ...
He kissed her; she caught his wrists. The joined meal of their
mouths came alive. The slope of her breasts, her hand half on his chest
and half on wool, was lost with her weight against him.
Their fingers met and meshed at his belt; a gasp bubbled in their kiss
(his heart was stuttering loudly), was blown away; then air on his thigh.
They lay down.
With her fingertips she moved his cock head roughly in her rough
hair while a muscle in her leg shook under his. Suddenly he slid into
her heat. He held her tightly around the shoulders when her movements were violent. One of her fists stayed like a small rock over her
breast. And there was a roaring, roaring: at the long, surprising come,
leaves hailed his side.
later, on their sides, they made a warm place with their mingled
breath. She whispered, "You're beautiful, 1 think" He laughed, without opening his lips. Closely, she looked at one of his eyes, looked at
the other (he blinked), looked at his chin (behind his lips he closed
his teeth so that his jaw moved), then at his forehead. (He liked her
lemon smell.) •... beautiful!" she repeated.
Wondering was it true, he smiled.
She raised her hand into the warmth, with small white nails, moved
one finger beside his nose, growled against his cheek.
He reached to take her wrist.
She asked, "Your hand ... ?"
So he put it behind her shoulder to pull her nearer.
She Twisted. "Is there something wrong with your ... 1"
He shook his head against her hair, damp, cool, licked it.
Behind him, the wind was cool. Below hair, her skin was hotter than
his tongue. He brought his hands around into the heated cave between
them.
She pulled back. "Your hands-!"
Veins like earthworms wriggled in the hair. The skin was cement
dry; his knuckles were thick with scabbed callous. Blunt thumbs lay
On the place between her breasts like toads.
She frowned, raised her knuckles toward his, stopped.
Under the moon On the sea of her, his fingers were knobbed peninsulas
4 Dahlgren
. Sunk on the promontory of each was a stripped-off, gnawed back, chitinous wreck.
"You ... ?" he began.
No, they were not deformed. But they were ... ugly! She looked up.
Blinking, her eyes glistened.
" ... do you know my ... ?" His voice hoarsened. "Who 1. .. am?"
Her face was not subtle; but her smile, regretful and mostly in the
place between her brow and her folded lids, confused.
"You," she said, full voice and formal (but the wind still blurred
some overtone), "have a father." Her hip was warm against his belly.
The air which he had thought mild till now was a blade to pry back his
loins. "You have a mummer-!" That was his cheek against her mouth.
But she turned her face away. "You are-" she placed her pale hand
over his great One (Such big hands for a little ape of a guy, someone had
kindly said. He remembered that) on her ribs-"beautiful Youve come
from somewhere. You're. going somewhere." She Sighed.
"But ... " He swallowed the things in his throat (he wasn't that little). "I've lost ... something."
"Things have made you what you are," she recited. "What you are
will make you what you will become .•
"I want something back!"
She reached behind her to pull him closer. The cold well between
his belly and the small of her back collapsed. "What don't you have?"
She looked over her shoulder at him: "How old are you?"
"Twenty-seven.»
"You have the face of someone much younger." She giggled. "1
thought yo", were ... sixteen! You have the hands of someone much
older-"
"And meaner?"
"-crueler than 1 think you are. Where were you born?"
"Upstate New York. You wouldn't know the town. 1 didn't stay there
lang."
"I probably wouldn't. You're a long way away."
"I've been to Japan. And Australia."
"You're educated?"
He laughed. His chest shook her shoulder. "One year at Columbia.
Almost another at a community college in Delaware. No degree."
"What year were you born?"
"Nineteen forty-eight. I've been in Central America too. Mexico. 1
just carne from Mexico and 1-"
"What do you want to change in the world?" she continued her
Prism, Mirror, Lens 5
recitation, looking away. "What do you want to preserve? What is the
thing you're searching for? What are you running away from?"
"Nothing," he said. "And nothing. And nothing. And ... nothing,
at least that 1 know."
have no purpose?
"I want to get to Bellona and-" He chuckled. "Mine's the same as
everybody else's; in real life, anyway: to get through the next second,
consciousness intact. 

II

The next second passed.
"Really?" she asked, real enough to make him realize the artificiality of what he'd said (thinking: It is in danger with the passing of each
one). "Then be glad you're not just a character scrawled in the margins
of somebody else's lost notebook: you'd be deadly dull. Don't you have
any reason for going there?"
"To get to Bellona and ... "
When he said no more, she said, "You don't have to tell me. So, you
don't know who you are 1 Finding that out would be much too Simple
to bring you all the way from upper New York by way of Japan,
here. Ahhh ... ' and she stopped.
"What?"
"Nothing."
"What?"
"Well, if you were born in nineteen forty-eight, you've got to be
older than twenty-seven."
"How do you mean?"
"Oh, hell," she said. "It isn't important.'
He began to shake her arm., slowly.
She said: "1 was born in nineteen forty-seven. And I'm a good deal
older then twenty-eight." She blinked at him again. "But that really
isn't i·m-"
He rolled back in the loud leaves. you know who I am?" Night
was some color between clear and cloud. ·You came here, to find me.
Can't you tell me what my name is?"
Cold spread down his side, where she had been, like butter.
He turned his head.
"Come!" As she sat, her hair writhed toward him. A handful of
leaves struck his face.
He sat 100.
But she was a[.ready running, legs passing and passing through
moon-dapple.
He wondered where she'd got that scratch.
6 Dhalgren
Grabbing his pants, he stuck foot and foot in them, grabbing his
shirt and single sandal, rolled to his feet She was rounding the rocks edge.
He paused for his fly and the twin belt hooks. Twigs and gravel
chewed his feet. She ran so fast!
He came up as she glanced back, put his hand on the stone-and
flinched: the rock-face was wet. He looked at the crumbled dirt on the
yellow ham and heel.
"There ... " She pointed into the cave. ·Can you see it?"
He started to touch her shoulder, but no.
She said: "Go ahead. Go in."
He dropped his sandal: a lisp of brush. He dropped his shirt: that
smothered the lisping.
She looked at him expectantly. stepped aside.
He stepped in: moss on his heel, wet rock on the ball of his foot. His
other foot came down: wet rock.
Breath quivered about him. In the jellied darkness something dry
brushed his cheek. He reached up: a dead vine crisp with leaves. It
swung: things rattled awfully far overhead. With visions of the mortal
edge, he slid his foot forward. His toes found: a twig with loose bark
... a clot of wet leaves ... the thrill of water ... Next step, water licked
over his foot. He stepped again:
Only IOck.
A flicker, left.
Stepped again, and the flicker was orange, around the edge of something; which was the wall of a rock niche, with shadow for ceiling, next
step.
Beyond a dead limb, a dish of hrass wide as a car tire had nearly
burned to embers. Something in the remaining fire snapped, spilling
sparks on wet stone.
Ahead, where the flicker leaked high up into the narrowing slash,
something caught and flung back flashings.
He climbed around one boulder, paused; the echo from breath and
burning cast up intimations of the cavern's size. He gauged a crevice,
leaped the meter, and scrambled on the far slope. Things loosened
under his feet. He heard pebbles in the gash complaining down rocks,
and stuttering, and whispering-and silence.
Then: a splash!
He pushed in his shoulders; h. had assumed it was only a yard or so
deep.
Prism, Mirror, Lens 7
He had to climb a long time. One face, fifteen feet high, stopped him
a while. He went to the side and clambered up the more uneven outcrappings. He found a thick ridge that, he realized as he pulled himself
up it, was a root He wondered what it was a root to, and gained the ledge.
Something went Eechl softly. six inches from his nose, and scurried
off among old leaves.
He swallowed, and the prickles tidaling along his shoulders subsided. He pulled himself the rest of the way, and stood:
It lay in a crack that slanted into roofless shadow.
One end looped a plume of ferns.
He reached for it; his body blocked the light from the brazier below:
glimmer ceased.
He felt another apprehension than that of the unexpected seen before, or aCcidentally revealed behind. He searched himself for some
physical sign that would make it real: quickening breath, slOwing heart.
But what he apprehended was insubstantial as a disjunction of the soul.
He picked the chain up; one end chuckled and flickered down the
stone. He turned with it t<l catch the orange glimmer.
Prisms.
Some of them, anyway.
Others were round.
He ran the chain across his hand. Some of the round ones were
transparent. Where they crossed the spaces between his fingers, the
light distorted. He lifted the chain to gaze through one of the lenses.
But it was opaque. Tilting it, he saw pass, dim and inches distant in the
circle, his own eye, quivering in the quivering glass.
Everything was quiet.
He pulled the chain across his hand. The random arrangement went
almost nine feet. Actually. three lengths were attached. Each of the
three ends looped on itself. On the largest loop was a small metal tag.
He stooped for more light.
The centimeter of brass (the links hradded into the optical bits were
brass) was inscribed: producto do Bra'!:i\.
He thought: What the hell kind of Portl1gliesft is that?
He crouched a moment longer looking along the glittering lines.
He tried to pull it all together for his jean pocket, but the three tangled yards spilled his palms. Standing, he found the largest loop and
lowered his head. Points and edges nipped his neck. He got the tiny
rings together under his chin and fi.ngered (Thinking: Like damned
clubs) catch closed.
8 Dhalgrrn
He looked at the chain in loops onight between his feet. He picked
up the shortest end from his thigh. The loop there was smaller.
He waited, held his breath even-then wrapped the length twice
around his upper arm, twice around his lower, and fastened the catch
at his wrist. He flattened his palm on the links and baubles hard as
plastic or metal. Chest hair tickled the creasing between joint and joint.
He passed the longest end around his back: the bits layout cold kisses on his shoulder blades. Then across his chest; his back once more;
his belly. Holding the length in one hand (it still hung down on the
stone), he unfastened his belt with the other.
Pants around his ankles, he wound the fmallength once around his
hips; and then around his right thigh; again around; and again. He fastened the last catch at his ankle. Pulling up his trousers, he went to the
ledge, buckled them, and turned to climb down.
He was aware of the bindings. But, chest flat on the stone, they were
merely lines and did not cut.
This time he went to whete the crevice was only a foot wide and
stepped far of the lip. The cave mouth was a lambda of moon mist,
edged with leaf-lace.
The rocks licked his sales. Once, when his mind wandered, it was
brought back by his foot in cold water; and the links were warm around
his body. He halted to feel for more heat; but the chain was only neutral weight.
He stepped out oato moss.
His shirt lay across a bush, his sandal, sale up, beneath.
He slipped his arms into the wool sleeves: his right wrist glittered
from the cuff. He buckled his sandal: the ground moistened his knee.
He slood, looking around, and narrowed his eyes on the shadows.
"Hey ... ?" He turned left, turned right, and scratched his collar-bone
with his wide thumb. "Hey; where ... ?" Turning right, turning left, he
wished he could interpret scuffs and broken brush. She wouldn't have
wandered down the way they'd come ..•
He left the cave mouth and entered the shingled black. Could she
have gone along here? he wondered three steps in. But went forward.
He recognized the road for moonlight the same moment his Sandaled foot jabbed into mud. His bar" one swung to the graveled shoulder. lie staggered out on the asphalt, oae foot sliding on flooded
leather, took a hissing breath, and gazed around.
Left, the road sloped up between the trees. He started right. Downward would take him toward the city.
Prism, Mirror, L<lts 9
On one side was forest. On the other, he realized after a dozen slippery jogs, it was only a hedge of trees. Trees dropped away with another dozen. Behind, the grass whispered and shushed him.
She was standing at the meadow's center.
He brought his feet-one strapped and muddy, one bare and
dusty-together; suddenly felt his heart beating; heard his surprised
breath shush the grass back. He stepped across the ditch to ill-mowed
stubble.
She's too tall, he tbought, nearing.
Hair lifted from her shoulders; grass whispered again.
She had been taller than he was, but not like ... "Hey, I got the ... !"
She was holding her arms over her head. Was she standing on some
stumpy pedestal? "Hey ... ? ..
She twisted from the waist: "What the hell are you doing herd"
At first he thought she was splattered with mud all up her tbigh. "I
thoug!!.t you ... ?" But it was brown as dried blood.
She gazed down at him with batting eyes.
Mud? Blood? It was the wrong color for either.
"Go a.way!l1
a. took another, entranced step.
"What are you doing here? Go away!"
Were the blotches under her breasts "Look, I got it! Now,
can't you tell me my ... ?"
Leaves were clutched in her raised hands. Her hands were raised so
highl Leaves dropped about her shoulders. Her long, long fingers
shook, and brittle darkness covered one flank. Her pale belly jerked
with a breath.
"No,l" She bent away when he tried to touch her; and stayed bent.
One arm, branched and branching ten reet over him, pulled a web of
shadow across the grass.
'You ... !" was the word he tried; breath was all that came.
He looked up among the twigs of her ears. Leaves shucked from her
eyebrows. Her mouth was a thick, twisted bole, as though some
footwide branch had been lopped off by lightning. Her eyes-his
mouth opened as he craned to see them-disappeared, first one, up
there, then the other, way over there: scabby lids sealed.
He backed through stiff grass.
A leaf crashed his temple like a charred moth.
Rough fingers bludgeoning his lips, !!'estumbled, turned, ran to the
road. glanced once more where the twisted trunk raked five branches
10 Dhalgren
at the moon, loped until he had to walk, walked-gasping-until he
could think. Then he ran some more.
2
It is not that I have no past. Rather, it continually fragments on the terrible and vivid ephemera of now. In the long country; cut with rain,
somehow there is nowhere to begin. Loping and limping in the ruts, it
would be easier not to think about what she did (was done to her, done
to her, done), trying instead to reconstruct what it is at a distance. Oh,
but it would not be so terrible had one calf not borne (if I'd looked
close, it would have been a chain of tiny wounds with moments ·of flesh
between; I've done that myself with a swipe in a garden past a rose)
that scratch.
The asphalt spilled him onto the highways shoulder. The paving's
chipped edges filed visions off his eyes. A roar came toward him he
heard only as it passed. He glanced back; the truck's red, rear eyes sank
together. He walked for another hour, saw no other vehicle.
A Mack with a double van belched twenty feet behind him, sagged to
a stop twenty feet ahead. He hadn't even been thumbing. He sprinted
toward the open door, hauled himself up, slammed it. The driver, tall,
blond, and acned, looking blank, released the clutch.
He was going to say thanks, but coughed. Maybe the driver wanted
somebody to rap at? Why else stop for someone just walking the road.
He didn't feel like rapping. But you have to say something:
'What you loading?"
"Artichokes."
Approaching lights spilled pit to pit down the drivers face.
They shook On down the highway.
He could think of nothing more, except: I was just making love to
this woman, see, and you'll never guess ... No, the Daphne bit would
not passIt was'he who wanted to talk! The driver was content to dispense
with phatic thanks and chatter. Western independence? He had
hitched this sector of country enough to decide it was all manic terror.
He leaned his head back. He wanted to talk and had nothing to say.
Fear past, the archness of it forced the architecture of a smile his lips
fought. .
He saw the ranked highway lights twenty minutes later and sat forward to see the turnoff. He glanced at the driver who was just glancing
away. The brakes wheezed, and the cab slowed by lurches.
Prism, Mirror; Lens 11
They stopped. The driver sucked in the sides of his ruined cheeks,
looked over, still blank.
He nodded, sort of smiled, fumbled the door, dropped to the road;
the door slammed and the truck started while he was still preparing
thanks; he had to duck the van corner.
The vehicle grumbled down the turnoff.
We only spoke a line apiece.
Wbat an odd ritual exchange to exhaust communication. (Is that
terror?) What amazing and engaging rituals are we practicing now?
(He stood on the road side, laughing.) Wbat torque and tension in the
mouth to laugh so in this windy; windy, windy ...
Underpass and overpass knotted here. He walked '.' . proudly? Yes,
proudly by the low wall.
Across the water the city flickered.
On its dockfront, down half a mile, flames roiled smoke on the sky
and reflections on the river. Here, not one car came off the bridge. Not
one went on.
This toll booth, like the rank of booths, was dark. He stepped inside: front pane shattered, stool overturned, no drawer in the registera third of the keys stuck down; a few bent. Some were missing their
heads. Smashed by a mace, a mallet, a fist? He dragged his fingers
across them, listened to them click, then stepped from the glassflecked, rubber mat, over the sill to the pavement.
Metal steps led up to the pedestrian walkway. But since there was
no traffic, he sauntered across two empty lanes-a metal grid sunk in
the blacktop gleamed where tires had polished it-to amble the broken white line, sandaled foot one side, bare foot the other. Girders
wheeled by him, left and right. Beyond, the burning city squatted on
weak, inverted images of its fires.
He gazed across the wale of night water, all wind-runneled, and
sniffed for burning. A gust parted the hair at the back of his neck;
smoke was moving ·offthe river.
"Hey. you!"
He looked up at the surprising flashlight. "Huh ... ?" At the walkway rail, another and another punctured the dark.
·You going into Bellona?"
"Thats right." Squinting, he tried to smile. One, and another, the
lights moved a few steps, stopped. He said: 'You're ... leaving?"
"Yeah. You know it's restricted in there."
He nodded. "But I haven't seen any soldiers or police or anything.
j just hitch-hiked down."
12 Dhalgren
"How were the rides'?"
"All I saw was two trucks for the last twenty miles. The second one
gave me a lift."
"What about the traffic going out?"
He shrugged. "But I guess girls shouldn't have too hard a time,
though. I mean, if a car passes, you'll probably get a ride. Where you
heading?'
"Two of us wanted to get to New York. Judy wants to go to San Francisco."
"I just want to get some place: a whiny voice came down. "I've got
a fever! I should be in bed. I was in bed for the last three days."
He said: "You've got a ways to go, either direction.'
"Nothing's happened to San Francisco-?"
"-or New York?'
"No." He tried to see behind the lights. "The papers don't even talk
about what's happening here, any more."
"But,Jesus! What about the television? Or the radio-"
'Stupid, none of it works out here. So how are they gonna know?"
"But--Ob, wow . . !"
He said: "The nearer you get, it's just less and less people. And the
ones you meet are ..• funnier. What's it like inside?"
One laughed.
Another said: "tt's pretty rough."
The one who'd spoken first said: "But like you say, girls have an easier time."
They laughed.
He did too. "Is there anything you can tell me? I mean that might
be helpful? Since I'm going in?"
"Yeah. Some men carne by, shot up the house we were living in, tore
up the place, then burned usout."
"She was making this sculpture," the whiny voice explained; "this big
sculpture. Of a lion. Out of junk metal and stuff. It was beautiful ... !
But she had to leave it."
"Wow," he said. "Is it like that?"
One short, hard laugh: ·Yeah. We got it real easy."
"Tell him about Calkins? Or the scorpions?"
"He'll learn about them." Another laugh. ·What can you say?"
"You want a weapon to take in with you?"
That made him afraid again. "Do I need one?"
But they were ,talking among themselves:
Prism, Mirror, Lens 13
"You're gonna give him that?"
"Yeah, why not? I don't want it with me
"Well, okay. It's yours."
Metal sounded on chain, while one asked: "Where you from?" The
flashlights turned away, ghosting the group. One in profile near the rail
was momentarily lighted enough to see she was very young, very black,
and very pregnant.
"Up from the south."
"You don't sound like you're from the south," one said who did.
"I'm notfrom the south. But I was just in Mexico."
'Oh, hey!" That was the pregnant one. "Where were you? I know
Mexico."
The exchange of half a dozen towns ended in disappointed silence.
"Here's your weapon."
Flashlights followed the flicker in the air, the clatter on the gridded
blacktop.
With the beams on the ground (and not in his eyes), he could make
out half a dozen women on the catwalk.
"What-" A car motor thrummed at the end of the bridge; but there
were no headlights when he glanced. The sound died on some
turnoff-Gis it?1t
"What'd they call it?"
"An orchid."
"Yeah, that's what it is."
He walked over, squatted in the triple beam.
"You wear it around your wrist. the blades sticking out front.
Like a bracelet."
From an adjustable metal wrist-band, seven blades, from eight to
twelve inches, curved sharply forward. There was a chain-and-Ieather
harness inside to hold it steady on the fingers. The blades were sharpened along the outside.
He picked it up.
"Put it on."
"Are you right or left handed?"
• Ambidextrous ... " which, in his case, meant clumsy with both. He
turned the "flower.' "But I write with my left. Usually." ,
"Oh.u
He fitted it around his wrist, snapped it. ·Suppose you were wearing this on a crowded bus. You could hurt somebody," and felt the witticism fall. He made a fist within the blades, opened it slowly and, be-
l'f Dhalgrrn
hind curved steel, rubbed two blunt and horny crowns on tbe underside of his great thumb.
"There aren't too many buses in Bellona."
Thinking: Dangerous, bright petals bent about some knobbed, halfrotted root. "Ugly thing; he told it, not them. "Hope 1 don't need you."
"Hope you don't either," one said above. "I guess you can give it to
somebody else when you leave."
"Yeah. n He stood up. "Sure."
"1fhe leaves,' another said, gave another laugh.
"Hey, we better get going."
"I heard a car. We're probably gonna have to wait long enough anyway. We might as well start.'
South: "He didn't make it sound like we were gonna get any rides."
"Lets just get going. Hey, so long!"
"So long. n Their beams swept by. "AI,d thanks.' Artichokes? But he
could not remember where the word had come from to ring so brightly.
He raised the orchid aker them.
Caged in blades, his gnarled hand was silhouetted with river glitter
S!Tdcm..g between the bridge strtlts. Watching them go, he felt the
vaguest flutter of desire. Only one of their flashlights was on. Then one
of them blocked that. They were footsteps on metal plates; some laughter drifting back; rustlings . . . '
He walked again, holding his hand from his side.
This parched evening seasons the night with remembrances of rain.
Very few suspect the existence of this city. It is as if not only the media
but the laws of perspective themselves have redesigned knowledge and
perception to pass it by. Rumor says there is practically no power here.
Neither lelevision cameras nor on-the-spot broadcasts function: that
such a catastrophe as this should be opaque, and therefore dull, to the
electric nation! It is a city of inner discordances and retinal distortions.
3
Beyond the bridge-mouth, pavement shatt<>red.
One lin street lamp lit five dead ones-two with broken globes.
Climbing a ten-foot, tilted, asphalt slab that jerked once under him,
rumbling like a live thing, he saw pebbles roll 01I the edge, heard them
clink on fugitive plumbing, then splash somewhere in darkness ... He
recalled the cave and vaulted 10 a more solid stretch, whose cracks were
mortared with nubby grass.
Prism, Mirror, Lens 15
No lights in any near buildings; but down those waterfront streets,
beyond the veils of smoke-was that Hre? Already used to the smell,
he had to breathe deeply to notice it. The sky was all haze. Buildings
jabbed up into it and disappeared.
Ught?
At the mouth of a four-foot alley, he spent ten minutes exploringjust because the lamp worked. Across the street he could make out
concrete steps, a loading porch under an awning, doors. A !Tuck had
overturned at the block's end. Nearer, three cars, windows rimmed
with smashed glass, squatted on skewed hubs, like frogs gone marvelously blind.
His bare foot was calloused enough for gravel and glass. But ash
kept working between his foot and his rematning sandal to grind like
finest sand, work its way under, and silt itself with his sweat. His heel
was almost sore.
By the gate at the alley's end, he found a pile of empty cans, a stack
of newspaper still wire-bound, bricks set up as a Hreplace with an
arrangement of pipes over it. Beside it was an army messpan, insides
caked with dead mold. Something by his moving foot crinkled.
He reached down. Oae of the orchids pelals snagged; he picked up
a package of-bread? The wrapper was twisted closed. Back under me
street lamp, he balanced it on his fingers, through the blades, and
opened the cellophane.
He had wondered about food.
He had wondered about sleep.
But he knew the paralysis of wonder.
The first slice had a tenpenny nailhead of muzzy green in the corner; the second and third, the same. The nail, he thought, was through
the loaf. The top slice was dry on one side. Nothing else was wrongexcept the green vein; and it was oBly that penicillium stulI. He could
eat around it.
rm not hungry.
He replaced the slices, folded the cellophane, carried it back, and
wedged it behind the stacked papers.
As he returBed to the lamp, a can clattered from his sandal, defini ng the silence. He wandered away through it, gazing up for some hint
of the hazed-out moonBreaking glass brought his eyes to street level.
He was afraid, and he was curious; but fear had been so constant, it
y,'as a dull and lazy emotion, now; the curiosity was alive:
16 Dhalgren
He sprinted to the nearest wall, moved along it rehearsing his apprehensions of all terrible that might happen. He passed a doorway,
noted it for ducking, and kept on to the corner. Voices noW. And more
glass.
He peered around the building edge.
Three people vaulted from a shattered display window to join two
waiting. Barking, a dog followed them to the sidewalk. One man wanted to climb back in; did. Two others took off down the block.
The dog circled, loped his wayHe pulled back, free hand grinding the brick.
The dog, crouched and dancing ten feet off, barked, barked, barked
again.
Dim light slathered canine tongue and teeth. Its eyes (he swallowed,
hard) were glistening red, without white or pupil, smooth as crimson
glass.
The man came back out the window. One in the group turned and
shouted: "Muriell" (It could have been a woman.) The dog wheeled
and fled after.
Another street lamp, blocks down, gave them momentary silhouette.
As he stepped from the wall, his breath unraveled the- silence,
shocked him as much as if someone had called his ... name? Pondering, he crossed the street toward the corner of the loading porch. On
the tracks under the awning, four- and six-foot butcher hooks swung
gently-though thOIe was no wind. In fact, he reflected, it would take
a pretty hefty wind to start them swinging-
"Hey!"
Hands, free and flowered, jumped to protect his face. He whirled,
crouching.
"You down there!'
He looked up, with hunched shoulders.
Smoke rolled about the building top, eight stories above.
"What you doing, huh?"
He lowered his hands.
The voice was rasp rough, sounded near drunk.
He called: "Nothing!" and wished his heart would still. "Just walking around."'
Behind scarves of smoke, someone stood at the cornice. "What you
been up to this evening?"
"Nothing, I said." He took a breath: " I just got here, over the bridge.
About a half hour ago."
Prisml MiTrOl; Lens 17
"Where'd you get the orchid?"
"Huh?" He raised his hand again. The street lamp dribbled light
down a blade. "This?"
"Yeah." .
"Some women gave it to me. When I was crossing the bridge."
"I saw you looking around the corner at the hubbub. I couldn't tell
from up here-was it scorpions?"
"Huh?"
"I said, was it scorpiOns?"
"It was a bunch of people trying to break into a store, I think. They
had a dog with them."
After silence, gravelly laughter grew. 'You really haven't been here
long, kid ... ?"
"1_" and realized the repetition-"just got here."
''You out to go explOring by yourself? Or you want company for a bit."
The guy's eyes, he reflected, must be awfully good. "Company ... I
guess."
"I'n be there in a minute. II
He didn't see the figure go; there was too much smoke. And after
he'd watched several doorways for several minutes, he figured the man
had changed his mind.
"Here you go,' from the one he'd set aside for ducking.
"Name is Loufer. Tak Loufer. You know what that means, Loufer?
Red Wolf; or Fire Wolf."
'Or Iron Wolf." He squinted. "Hello."
"Iron Wolf? Well, yeah ... " The man emerged, dim on the top step.
"Don't know if I like that one so much. Red Wolf. That's my favorite."
He was a very big man.
He came down two more steps: His engineer's boots, hitting the
boards, sounded like dropped sandbags. Wrinkled black-jeans were
half stuffed into the boot tops. The worn cycle jacket was scarred with
zippers. Gold stubble on chin and jaw snagged the street light. Chest
and belly, bare between flapping zipper teeth, were a tangle of brass
hair. The fingers were massive, matted-UWhat's your name?"-but
clean, with neat and cared-for nails.
"Urn . .. well, I'll tell you: I don't know." It sounded funny, so he
laughed. "I don't know."
Loufer stopped, a step above the sidewalk, and laughed too. "Why
the hell don't you?" The visor of his leather cap blocked his upper face
with shadow.
lie shrugged. "I just don't. I haven't for ... a while now."
Loufer came down the last step, to the pavement, "Well, Tak Loufers
met people here with stranger stories than that. You some kind of nut,
or something? You been in a mental hospital, maybe?"
"Yes ... " He saw that Loufer had expected a NQ.
Thkl; head oocked. The shadow rose 10 show the rims of Negra-wide
nostrils above an extremely Caucasian mouth. The jaw looked like
rocks in hay-stubble.
"Just for a year. About six or seven years ago."
Loufer shrugged. "I was in jarl for three months ... about six or
seven years ago. But thats as close as I come. So you're a no-name kid?
What are you, seventeen? Eighteen? No, I bet you're even-"
"Twenty-seven."
. Tak's head cocked the other way. Light topped his cheek bones.
"Neurotic fatigue; do it every time. You notice that about people with
serious depression, the kind that sleep all day? Hospital type cases, I
mean. THey always look ten years younger than they are."
He nodded.
"I'm going 10 caU you Kid, then. That'U do you for a name. You can
be-The Kid, hey?"
Three gifts, he thought: armor, weapon, title (like the prisms, lenses, mirrors on the chain itselO. "Okay ... " with the sudden conviction
,this third would cost, by far, the most. Reject it, something warned:
"Only I'm not a kid. Really; I'm twenty-seven. People always think I'm
younger than I am. I just got a baby face, that's all. I've even got Same
white hair, if you want to see--'
"Look, Kid-" with his middle fingers, Thk pushed up his visor-
"we're the same age." Bis eyes were large, deep, and blue. The hair
above his ears, no longer than the weeks beard, suggested a severe crew
under the cap. "Any Sights you particularly want to see around here?
Anything you heard about? 1 like to play guide. What do you hear
about us, outside, anyway? What do people say about us here in the
eity?"
"Not much."
"Guess they wouldn't.· Tak looked away. "You just wander in by aceident, or did you come on purpose?"
"Purpose."
"Good Kid! Like a man with a purpose. Come on up here. This
street turns into Broadway sOOn as it leaves the waterfront.»
"What is there to see?"
Prism, Mirror, Lens 19
Loufer gave a grunt that did for a laugh. "Depends on what sights
are out.' Though he had the beginning of a gut, the ridges under the
belly hair were muscle deep. "If we're really lucky. maybe-" the ashy
leather, swinging as Loufer turned, winked aver a circular brass buckle
that held together a two-inch-wide garrison-owe won't run into anything at all! Come on." They walked.
' ... kid. The Kid .. ."
"Huh?" asked Loufer.
"I'm thinking about that name."
"Will it do?"
"I don't know.'"
Loufer laughed. "I'm not going to press for it, Kid. But I think it's
yours."
His own chuckle was part denial, part friendly.
Loufer's grunt in answer echoed the friendly.
They walked beneath low smoke.
There is something delicate about this Iron Wolf, with his face like
a pug-nosed, Germanic gorilla. It is neither his speech nor his carriage,
which have their roughness, but the ways in which he asstlmes them,
as though the surface where speech and carriage are flush were somehow inflamed.
"Hey, Tak?"
"Yeah?"
"How long have you been here?"
"If you told me today's date, I could figure it out. But I've let it go.
Its been a whUe.· After a moment Loufer asked, in a strange, less blustery voice: "Do you know what day it is?"
"No, I .. ." The strangeness scared him. "I don't." He shook his head
while his mind rushed away toward some other subject. "What do you
do? 1 mean, what did you work at?"
Tak snorted. "Industrial engineering."
"Were you working here, before ... all this?"
"Near here. About twelve miles down, at Helmsford. There used to
be a plant that jarred peanut butter. We were converting it into a vitamin C factory. What do you do-? Naw, you don't look like you do too
much in the line of work." Loufer grinned "Right?"
He nodded. It was reassuring to be judged by appearances, when
the judge was both accurate and friendly. And. anyway, the rush had
stopped.
"I was staying down in Helmsford," Loufer went on. "But I used to
20 Dhalgren
drive up to the city a lot. Bellona used to be a pretty good town." Tak
glanced at a doorway too dark to see if it was open or shut. "Maybe it
still is, you know? But one day I drove up here. And it was like this.'
A fire escape, above a .stree.t lamp pulsing slow as a failing heart,
looked like charred sticks, some still aglow.
"Just like this?"
On a store window their reflection slid like ripples over oit
"There were a few more places the fire hadn't reached; a few more
people who hadn't leCt yet-not all the newcomers had arrived."
"You were here at the very beginning, then?"
"Oh, I didn't see it break out or anything. Like I say, when I got here,
it looked more Or less like it does now."
"Where's your carT"
"Sitting on the street with the windshield busted, the tires gonealong with most of the motor. I let a lot of stupid things happen, at first.
But I got the hang of it after a. while." Tak made a sweeping gesture
with both hands-and disappeared before it was finished: they'd
passed into complete blackness. "A thousand people are supposed to
be here now. Used to be almost two million."
"How do you know, I mean the population?"
"Thats what they publish in the paper."
"Why do you stay?"
"Stay?" Loufer's voice neared that other, upsetting tone. "Well, actually, I've thought about that one a lot. I think it has to do with-I got
a theory now-freedom. You know, here-" ahead, something
moved- "you're free. No laws: to break, or to follow. Do anything you
want. Whi.ch does funny things to you. Very quickly, surprisingly
quickly, you become-" they neared another half-lit lamp; what moved
became smoke, lobling from a window sill set with glass teeth like an
extinguishedjack-o-Iantern- "exactly who you are." And Tak was visible again. "If you're ready for that, this is where its at."
"It must be pretty dangerous. Looters and stuff."
Tak nodded. "Sure its dangerous."
"Is there a lot of street mugging?"
"Some." Lourer made a face. "Do you know about crime, Kid? Crime
is funny. For instance, now, in most American cities-New York Chicago, St. Louis-crimes, ninety-five per cent I read, are committed between
six o'clock and midnight. That means you're safer walking around the
street at three o'clock in the morning than you are going to the theater
to catch a seven-thirty curtain. I wonder what time it is now. Sometime
Prism, Mirror, Lens 21
after two I'd gather. I don't think Bellona is much more dangerous than
any other city. Its a very small city, now. That's a sort of protection."
A forgotten blade scraped his jeans. "Do you carry a weapon?"
"Months of detailed study on what is going on where, the movements and variations of our town. I look around a lot. This way."
That wasn't build·ings on the other side of the street: Trees rose
above the park wall, black as shale. Loufer headed toward the entrance.
"Is it safe in there?"
"Looks pretty scary." Tak nodded. "Probably keep any criminal with
a grain of sense at home. Anybody who wasn't a mugger would be out
of his mind to go in there. " He glanced back, grinned. "Which prObably means all the muggers have gotten tired of waiting and gone home
to bed a long time ago. Come on."
Stone lions lilanked the entrance.
"Its funny,' Tak said; they passed between. "You show me a place
where they tell women to stay out of at night because of all the nasty,
evil men lurking there to do nasty. evil things; and you know what
you'll find?"
"Queers."
Tak glanced over, pulled his cap visor down. "Yeah."
The dark wrapped them up and buoyed them along the path.
There is nothing safe about the darkness of this city and its stink.
Well, I have abrogated all claitn to safety. coming here. It is better to
discuss it as though I had chosen. That keeps the scrim of sanity before the awful set. What will lift it?
"What were you in prison for?"
"Morals charge," Tak said.
He was steps behind loufer now. The path, which> had begun as concrete, was now dirt. leaves hit at him. Three times his bare foot came
down on rough roots; once his swinging arm scraped lightly against
bark.
o Actually." Tak tossed back into the black between them, "I was acquitted. The situation, I guess. My lawyer figured it was better I stayed
in jail without bail for ninety days, like a misdemeanor sentence.
Something had got lost in the records. Then, at court, he brought that
all out, got the charge changed to public indecency; I'd already served
sentence.' Zipper-jinglings suggested a shrug. "Everything considered, it worked out. Look!"
The carbon black of leaves shredded, letting through the ordinary
color of urban night.
22 Dhalgren
"Where?" They had stopped among trees and high brush.
"Be quiet! There ... "
His wool shushed Taks leather. He whispered: "Where do you ... ?
Out on the path, sudden,luminous, and artificial, a seven-foot dragon swayed around the corner, followed by an equally tal.J mantis and a
griffm. Like elegant plastics, internally lit and misty. they wobbled forward. When dragon and mantis swayed into each other, theymeshed!
He thought of images, slightly unfocused, on a movie screen, lapping.
"Scorpions ... !" Tak whispered.
Taks shoulder pushed his.
His hand was on a tree trunk. Twig shadows webbed his forearm,
the back of his hand, the bark. The figures neared; the web slid. The
figures passed; the web slid off. They were, he realized, as eye-unsettling as pictures on a three-dimensional postcard-with the same striations hanging, like a screen, just before, or was it just behind them.
The griffin, further back, flickered:
A scrawny youngster, with pimply shoulders, in the middle of a cautious, bow-legged stride-then griffin again. (A memory of spiky. yellow hair; hands held out from the freckled, pelvic blade.)
The mantis swung around to look back, went momentarily out:
This one, anyway. was wearing some c1othes-a brown, brutal looking youngster; the chains he wore for necklaces·growled under his
palm, while he absently caressed his left breast. "Come on, Baby! Get
your ass in gear!" which came from a mantis again.
"Shit, you think they gonna be there?" from the griffin.
"Aw, sure. They gonna be there!" You could have easily mistaken
the voice from the dragon for a man's; and she sounded black.
Suspended in wonder and confusion, he listened to the conversation of the amazing beasts. •
"They better be!' Vanished chai·ns went on growling.
The griffin flickered once more: pocked buttocks and dirty heels
disappeared behind blazing scales.
"Hey. Baby. suppose they're not there yet?'
"Oh, shit! Adam ... ?"
"Now, Adam, you koow they're gonoa be there," the dragon assured.
"Yeah? How do 1 know? Oh, Dragon Lady! Dragon Lady. you're too
much!"
"Come on. The two of you shut up, huh?"
Prism, Mirror, Lens 23
Swaying together and apart, they rounded another corner.
He couldn't see his hand at all now, so he let it fall from the trunk.
"What ... what are they?"
"Told you: scorpions. Sort of a gang. Maybe its more than one gang.
1 don't really koow. You get fond of them after a while, if you know
how to stay out of their way. If you can't ... well, you either join, 1
guess; or get messed up. Least, that's how 1 found it."
"1 mean the ... the dragons and things?«
"Pretty, huh?»
"What are they?"
"You koowwhat is it a hologram? They're prOjected from interference
patterns off a very small, very low-powered laser. Its not complicated.
But it looks impressive. They call them light-shields."
"Oh.· He glanced at his shoulder where Tak had dropped his hand.
"I've heard of holograms.«
Tak led him out of the hidden niche of brush onto the concrete. A
few yards down the path, in the direction the scorpions had come from,
a lamp was working. They started in that direction.
"Are th.ere more of them around?"
"Maybe." Taks upper face was again masked. "Their light-shields
don't really shield them from anything-other than our prying eyes
from the ones who want to walk around bare-assed. When 1 first got
here, all you saw were scorpions. Then griffins and the other kinds
started shOwing up a little while ago. But the genre name stuck." Tak
slid his hands into his jean pockets. His jacket, joined at the bottom
by the zipper fastener, rode up in front for non-existent breasts. Tak
stared down at them as he walked. When he looked up, his smile had
no eyes over it. "You forget people don't know about scorpions. About
Calkins. They're famous here. Bellona:' a big city; with something that
famous in any other city in the country. why 1 guess people in L.A.,
Chicago, Pittsburgh, Washington would be dropping it all over the carpet at the in cocktail parties, huh? But they've forgotten we're here."
"No. They haven't forgotten." Though he couldn't see Tak's eyes, he
knew they had narrowed.
"So they send in people who don't koow their own name. Like
you?"
He laughed, sharply; it felt like a bark.
Tak returned the hoarse sound that was his own laughter. "Dh,
yeah! You're quite a kid." Laughter trailed on.
"Where we going now?"
24 Dhalgre:n
But Tak lowered his chin, strode ahead.
From this play of night,light, and leather, can I let myself take identity? How can I recreate this roasted park in some meaningful matrix?
Equipped whh contradictory visions, an ugly hand caged in pretty
metal, I observe a new mechanics. I am the wild machinist, past destroyed, reconstructing the present.
4
"Tak!" she called across the fire, rose, and shook back fire-colored hair.
''Who'd you bring?" She swung around the cinderblock furnace and
came on, a silhouette now, stepping over sleeping bags, blanket rolls,
a lawn of reposing forms. Two glanced at her, then turned over. Two
others snored at different pitches.
A girl on a blanket, with no shirt and really nice breasts, stopped
playing her harmonica, !>anged it on her palm for spit, and blew once
more.
The redhead rounded the harmonica player and seized Tak's cuff,
close enough now to have a face again. "We haven't seen you in days!
happened? You used to come around for dinner practically every
mght. John was worried about you." It was a pretty face in half light.
UI wasn't worried," A tall, long-hai.red ma'B. in a Peruvian vest
walked over from the picnic table. "Tak comes. Tak goes. You know
how Tak is." Around the miniature flames, reflected in his glasses, even
in this light his tan suggested chemicals or sunlamps. His hair was pale
and thin and looked as if day would show sun streaks. "You're closer
to breakfast time than you are to dinner, right now." He-John?-
tapped a rolled newspaper against his thigh.
"Come on. Tell me, Tak." She smiled; her face wedged with deeper
shadows. "Who have you broughtJohn and me this time?" while John
glanced up (twin flames slid off his lenses) for hints of dawn.
Tak said: "This is the Kid."
"Kit?" she asked.
"Kid.H
"K-y-d-d ... ?"
"_i_d.n
" ... Ii," she added with a tentative frown. "Oh, Kidd."
IfTak had an expression you couldn't see it.
He thought it was charming, though; though something else about
it unsettled.
Prism, Mirror, Lens 25
She reared her shoulders back, blinking. "How are you, Kidd? Are
you new? Or have you been hiding out in the shadows for and
months?" To Tak: "Isn't it amazing how we're always turnmg up people like that? You think you've met everybody in the city there is to
meet. Then, suddenly; somebody who;; been here all along, watching
you from the bushes, sticks his nose out-"
"That's how we met Tak," John said. To Tak: "Isn't it, Tak?"
Tak said: "He's new."
"Oh. Well," John said, "we've got this thing going here. Do you want
to explain it to him, Mildred?"
"Well, we figure-" Mildred's shoulders came, officially; forward.
"We figure we have to survive together some way. I mean we can't be
at each other's throats like animals. And it would be so easy for a situation like this-" He was sure her gesture, at 'this,' included nothing
beyond the firelight-"to degenerate into something ... well, awful!
So we've set up I guess you'd call it a commune. Here, in the park. People get food, work together, know they have some sort of protection.
We try to be as organic as possible, but that's getting harder and harder.
When new people come into Bellona, they can get a chance to learn how
things operate here. We don't take in everybody. But when we do, we're
very accepting." There was a tic somewhere (in him or her, he wasn't
sure, and started worrying about it) like a nick in a wire pulled over an
edge. "You are new? We're always glad when we get somebody new."
He nodded, while his mind accelerated, trying to decide: him? her?
Tak said: "Show him around, Milly."
John said: "Good idea, Mildred. Tak, I want to talk to you about
something," tapping his newspaper again. "Oh, here. Maybe you want
to take a look at this?"
"What? Oh ... " You couldn't worry so much about things like tltat.
Often, though, he had to remind himself. "Thanks." He took the foldedpaper.
"All right, Tak." John, with Tak, turned away. "Now when are you
going to start those foundations for us? I can give you-"
"Look,John." Tak put his hand onJohn's shoulder as they wandered
off. "All you need is the plans, and you can-"
Then they were out of earshot.
"Are you hungry?"
"No." She was pretty.
"Well, if you are-come, let's go over here-we start cooking breakfast soon as it gets light. That's not too far off."
26 Dhalgren
"You been up all night?" he asked.
"No. But when you go to bed at sundown, you wake up pretty early."
"I have."
"We do a lot of work here-" she slipped her hands into her back
pockets; her jeans, torn short, were bunched high on her thighs-"during the day. We don't just sit around. John has a dozen projects going.
It's pretty hard to sleep with people hammering and building and what
all." She smiled.
"I've been up; but I'm not tired. When I am, I can sleep through anything." He looked down at her legs.
As she walked, light .nong them closed and crossed. nOh, we
wouldn't mind if you reaHywanted to sleep. We don't want to force
anybody. But we have to maintain some kind of pattern, you understand."
·Yeah, I understand He'd been flipping the newspaper against
his own thigh. Now he raised it.
"Why do you go around wearing an orchid?" she asked. "Of course,
with the city in the state it's in, I guess it makes sense. And really, we
do accept many life styles here. But ... "
"Some people gave it to me.' He turned the rolled newspaper
around.
SERIOUS WATER
He let the tabloid fall loose.
SHORTAGE THREATENS
The date said Tuesday, February 12, 1995. "What the hell is that?"
She looked concerned. "Well, there's not very"inany people around
who know how to keep things running. And we've all been expecting
the water to become a real problem any day. You have no idea how
much they used when they were trying to put out the fires."
"I mean the 1995?"
"Oh. just Calkins.» On the picnic table sat a carton of canned
goods. "I think it's amazing we have a newspaper at all." She sat on the
bench and looked at him expectantly. "The dates are just his little
joke."
"Oh.» He sat beside her. "Do you have tents here? Anything for shelter?" still thinking: 1995?
"Well, we're pretty ourooors oriented." She looked around, while he
tried to feel the city beyond the leafy, fire-lit grotto. "Of course, Takhe's promised to give John some simple blueprints. For cabins. John
wants Takto head the whole project. He reels it would be good for him.
Prism, Mirror, Lens 27
You know, Tak is so strange. He feels, somehow, we won't accept him.
At least I think he does. He has this very important image of himself
as a loner. He wants to give us the plans-he's an engineer, you knowand let us carry them out. But the value of something like that isn't
just the house-or shack-that results. It should be a creative, internal thing for the builder. Don't you think?"
For something to do, he held his teeth together, hard.
"You're sure you're not hungry?"
"Oh. No."
"You're not tired? You can get in a few hours if you want. Work
doesn't start till after breakfast. I can get you a blanket, if you'd like."
"No.'"
In the firelight, he thought he might count twenty-five years in her
firm, clear face. "I'm not hungry. I'm not sleepy. I didn't even know Tak
was bringing me here."
"It's a very nice place. It really is. The community of feeling is so
warm, if nothing else." Probably only twenty.
The harmonica player played again.
Someone in an olive-drab cocoon twisted beyond the fire.
Mildred's tennis sneaker was a foot from the nearest sleepers canvas covered head.
"I wish you wouldn't wear that." She laughed.
H. opened his big fingers under metal.
"I mean, if you want to stay here. Maybe then you wouldn't have to
wearit.n
"I don't have to wear it," and decided to keep it on.
The harmonica squawked.
He looked up.
From the trees, light brighter than the fire and green lay leafy shadows over sleeping bags and blanket roBs. Then ballooning claws and
barbed, translucent tail collapsed:
"Hey, you got that shit ready for us?"
A lot of chains hung around his neck. He had a wide scab (with
smaller ones below it) on the bowl of his shoulder, like a bad rail on
cement. Chains wound around one boot: He jingled when he walked.
"Come on, come on. Bring me the fuckin' junk!" He stopped by the
fireplace. Flames burnished his large arms, his small face. A front
tooth was broken. "Is that it?" He gestured bluntly toward the picniC
table, brushed tangled, black hair, half braided, from his shoulder, and
came on.
28 Dhalgren
"Hello!" Mildred said, with the most amazing smile. "Nightmare!
How have you been?"
The scorpion looked down at her, wet lip high off his broken tooth,
and said, slowly, "ShH," which could have meant a lot of things. He
wedged between them-"Get out of the-" saw the orchid-"fucking
way, huh?" and lugged the carton of canned goods off the table edge
against ms belly, where ripe, wrinkled jeans had sagged so low you
could see stomach hair thicken toward pubic. He looked down over his
thick arm at the weapon, closed his mouth, shook his head. "Shit,"
again, and: "What thefuckyoustaring at?" Between the/laps of NightmareS cut-down vest, prisms, mirrors, and lenses glittered among dark
cycle chain, bright stainless links, and hardware-store brass.
"Nothing."
Nightma,e sucked his teeth in disgust, turned, and stumbled on a
sleeping bag. "Move, damn ill"
A head shook loose from the canvas; it was an older man, who started digging under the glasses he'd probably worn to sleep, then gazed
after the scorpion lumbering off among the trees.
He saw things move behind Millys face, was momentarily sure she
was going to call good-bye. Her tennis shoe dragged the ground.
Down her lower leg was a scratch.
He frowned.
She said: "That was Nightmare. Do you know about the scorpions?"
"Tak told me some. '
"Its amazing how well you can get along with people if you're just
nice. Of course their idea of being nice back is a little odc:!. They used
to volunteer to beat up people for us. They kept wanting John to find
somebody for them to work over-somebody who was annoying us,
of course. Only nObody was." She hunched her shoulders.
"I guess," he offered from the faulted structure of his smile, "you
have trouble with them sometimes?"
"Sometimes." Her smile was perfect. "I just wish John had been
here. Johns very good with them. I think Nightmare is a little afraid of
John, you know? We do a lot for them. Share our food with them. I
think they get a lot from us. If they'd just acknowledge their need,
though, they'd be so much easier to help."
The harmonica was silent: The bare-breasted gid had gone from her
blanket.
"How'd you get that scratch?"
"Just an accident. With John." She Shrugged. "From one of those,
actoally." She nodded toward his orchid. "It isn't anything."
Prism, Mirror, Lens 29
He leaned to touch it, at her: She hadn't moved. So he lay
his forefinger on her shin, moved it down. The scab line ran under his
callous like a tiny rasp.
She frowned. "It really isn't anything." Framed in heavy red, it was
a gentle frown. "Whats that?" She pointed. "Around your wrist."
His cuff had pulled up when he'd leaned.
He shrugged. Confusion was like struggling to find the proper way
to sit inside his skin. "Something 1 found." He wondered if she heard
the question mark on his sentence, small as a period.
Her eyebrow's movement said she had: which amused him.
The optical glass flamed over his knobby wrist.
"Where do you get it? I've seen several people wear that ... kind of
chain."
He nodded. "I just found it."
"Where?" Her gentle smile urged.
"Where did you get your scratch?"
Still smiling, she returned a bewildered look.
He had expected it. And he mistrusted it. "I ... " and the thought
resolved some internal cadence: "want to know about you!" He was
suddenly and astonishingly happy. "Have you been here long? Where
are you Cram? Mildred? Mildred what? Why did you come here? How
long are you going to stay? Do you like Japanese food? Poetry?" He
laughed. 'Silence? Water? Someone saying your name?"
"Urn . .. " He saw she was immensely pleased. "Mildred Fabian, and
people do call me Milly, like Tak does. John just feels he has to be formal when new people come around. 1 was here at State University. But
I come from Ohio ... Euclid, Ohio?"
He nodded again.
"But State's got such a damned good poli-sci department. Had,
anyway. So I came here. And ... " She dropped her eyes (brown, he realized with a half-second memory, as he looked at her lowered, corncolored lashes-brown with a coppery backing, copper like her hair)
" ... I stayed."
"You were here when it happened?"
' ... yes." He heard a question mark there bigger than any in the
type-box.
·What ... " and when he said, " ... happened?" he didn't want an
answer.
Her eyes widened, dropped again; her shoulders sank; her back
f01mded. She reached toward his hand in its cage, lying between them
on the bench.
30 Dhalgren
As she took a shiny blade tip fingers, he was aware of
his palm's suspension in its harness.
"Does ... I've always ... well, could you make an ... » She tugged
the point to the side (he relt the pressure on his wrist and stiffened his
hand), released it: A mumed Dmmmmm. "Oh."
He was puzzled.
"I was wondering,' she explained, "if you could make it ring. Like
an instrument. All the blades are different lengths. I thought if they
made notes, perhaps you could ... play them."
"Blade steel? I don't think its brittle enough. BeIls and things are
iron.1:I
She bent her head to the side.
"Things have to be brittle if they're going to ring. Like glass. Knives
are hard, sure; but they're too flexible."
She looked up after a moment. "I like music. I was going to major
in music. At State. But the poli-sci department was so good. I don't
think I've seen one Japanese restaurant in Bellona, since I've been in
school here. But there used to be several good Chinese ones ... ' Something happened in her face, a Ioosening, part exhaustion, part despair.
"Wet.'te doing the best we caRl you kn.ow . . . ?71.
"What?"
"We're doing the best we can. Here."
He nodded a small Bod.
"When it happened," she said softly, "it was terrible." "Terrible" was
perfectly flat, the way he remembered a man in a brown suit once say
"elevator.» Iis that tone, he thought, remembering when it had denuded Taks speech. She said: "We stayed. I stayed. I guess I felt 1 had
to stay. 1 don't know how long ... I mean, I'm going to stay for. But we
have to do something. Since were here, we have to." She took a breath.
A muscle leaped in her jaw. "You ... ?"
"Me what?"
"What do you like, Kidd? Someone saying your name?"
He knew it was innocent; and was annoyed anyway. His lips began
a Well, but only breath came.
"Silence?"
Breath became a hiss; the hiss became) " . .. sometimes."
"Who are you? Where are you from?"
He hesitated, and watched her eyes pick something from it:
'You're afraid because you're new here ... I think. I'm afraid 1 think , ,
because I've been here ... an awfully long time!» She looked arouBd
the campsite.
Prism, Mirror, Lens 31
Two long-haired youngsters stood by the cinderblocks. One held up
his hands, either to warm them, or just to feel heat.
It is a warm morning. I do not recognize any protection in this leafy
blister. There is no articulation in the juncture of object and shadow,
BO fixed angle between fuel and flame. Where would they put their
shelters, foundations sunk on ash; doors and windows sinking in cinders? There is nothing else to trust but what warms.
Mildreds lips parted, her eyes narrowed. "You know what John did?
I think it was brave, too. We had just finished building that fireplace;
there were only a few of us here, then. Somebody was going to light it
with a cigarette lighter. But John said, wait; then went off all the way
to Holland Lake. That was when the burning was much worse than it
is now. And he brought back a brand-an old, dried, burning stick. In
fact he had to transfer the fire to several other sticks on the way back.
And with that fire-" she nodded where one of the youngsters was now
poking at the logs with a broken broom-handle-"he lit ours.» The
other waited with a chunk of wood in his arms. "I think that was very
brave. Don't you?" The chunk feH. Sparks geysered through the grate,
higher than the lowest branches.
"Hey, Milly!"
Sparks whirled, and he wondered why they aH spoke so loud with
so many sleeping.
"Milly! Look what 1 found." .
She had put On a blue workshirt, still unbuttoned. In one hand was
her harmonica, in the other a spiral notebook. .
"What is it?" Milly called back.
As she passed the furnace, she swung the notebook through the
sparks; they whipped into Catherine wheels, and sank. "Does it belong
to anybody around here? It's burned. On the cover.»
She sat with it, between them, shoulders hunched, face in a concentrated scowl. "!t's somebody's exercise book." The cardboard was
flaky black at one corner. Heat had stained half the back.
"Whats in it?" Milly asked.
She shrugged. Her shoulder and her hip moved on his. He slid down
the bench to give her room, considered sliding back, but, instead,
picked up the newspaper and opened it-blades tore one side-to the
second page.
"Who ripped out the first pages?" Millyasked.
"That's the way I found it."
"But you can see the torn edges, still inside the wire."
"Neat handwriting.»
32 Dhalgrrn
"Can you make out what it says?'"
"Not in this light. I read some down by the park lamp. Lets take it
over by the fire.·
The page he stared at fl.ickered with backlight, the print on both
sides visible. All he could make out was the Gothic masthead:
And below it:
He closed the paper.
BELLONA TIMES
Roger Calkins,
Editor and Publisher.
The girls had gone to the fireplace.
He stood, left the paper OR the bench, stepped, one after another,
over three sleeping bags and a blanket roll. "What does it say?"
Her harmonica was still in one fist.
Her hair was short and thick. Her eyes, when she looked at him directly. were Kelly green. Propping the book on the crook of her arm,
with her free hand she turned back the cardboard cover for him to see
the first page. Remnants of green polish flecked her nails.
In Palmer-perfect script, an interrupted sentence took up on the top
line:
to wound the autumnal city.
So howled outfor the world to give him a name.
That made goose bumps on his flanks ...
The in-dark answered with wind.
All you· know I know: ,aruning astronauts and bank clerks
glancing at the clock before lunch; actresses cowling at light-ringed
mirrors and freight elevator operators grinding a thumbJuI of grease
on a steel handle; student
She lowered the notebook to stare at him, blinked green eyes. Hair
wisps shook shadow splinters on her cheek. ·What's the matter with
you?ft
His face tensed toward a smile. "Thats just some ... weK, pretty
weird stuffl"
Prism, Mirror, Lens 33
"Whats weird about it?" She closed the cover. "'You got the strangest
look."
"I don't ... But ... " His smile did notfeel right. What was there to
dislodge it lay at the third point of a triangle whose base vertices were
recognition and incomprehension. "Only it was 50 .. ." No, start again.
"But it was so ... I know a lot about astronauts, 1 mean. 1 used to look
up the satellite schedules and go out at night and watch for them. And
I used to have a friend who was a bank clerk."
"I knew somebody who used to work in a bank," Milly said. Then,
to the other girl: "Didn't yo" ever?"
He said: "And I used to have a job in a theater. It was on the second
floor and we always had to carry things up in the freight elevator ... "
These memories were so simple to retrieve ... "I was thinking about
him-the elevator operator---earlier tOnight."
They still looked puzzled.
"It was just very familiar.'
"Well, yeah .. ." She moved her thumb over the bright harmonica.
"r must have been on a freight elevator, at least once. Hell, I was in a
school play and there were lights around· the dressing room mirror.
That doesn't make it weird."
"But the part abo"t the stlident riots. And the bodegas ... I just
came up from Mexico."
"It doesn't say anytbing about student riots.'
"Yes it does. I was in a student riot once. I'll show you." He reached
for the book (she pulled back sharply from the orchid), spread his free
hand on the page (she came forward again, her shoulder brushing his
arm. He could See her breast inside her unbuttoned shirt. Yeah) and
read aloud:
"' ... thumbf"l of grease on a steel handle; student happenings with
spaghetti fined Volkswagens, dawn in Seattle, automated evening in
LA.'" He looked up, confused.
"Yo,,'ve been in Seattle and Los Angeles, morning and night, too?"
Her green-eyed smile flickered beside ,the flames.
"No .. ." He shook his head.
.'[ have. Itl; still not weird." Still flickering, she frowned at his frown.
"\I's not about you. Unless you dropped it in the park ... You didn't
write it, did yo,,?"
"No ," he said. "No. I didn't." Lost (it had been stronger and
stranger than any dtjll vu), the feeling harassed him. "But I could have
sworn I knew . . ." The fire felt hottest through the hole at his knee;
34 Dhalgren
he reached down to scratch; blades snagged raveled threads. He
snatched the orchid away: Threads popped. Using his other hand, he
mauled his patella with horny fingers.
Milly had taken the book, turned a later page.
The green-eyed girl leaned over her shoulder.
"Read that part near the end, about the lightning and the explosions
and the riot and all. Do you he was writing about what happened
here-to Bellona, I mean?"
"Read that part at beginning, about the scorpions and the
trapped children. What do you suppose he was writing about there?"
They bent together in firelight.
He felt discomfort and looked around the clearing.
Tak srepped over a sleeping bag and said to John: "You people want
me to work too hard. You just refuse to understand that work for its .
own sake is something I see no virtue in at all."
"Aw, come on, Tak. "John beat his hand absently against his thigh
as though he still held the rolled paper.
"I'H give you the plans. You can do what you want with them. Hey,
Kid, how's it going?" Flames bruised Tak's bulky jaw, prised his pale
eyes into the light, flickered on his leather visor. 'You doing all right?"
He swaHowed, which clamped his teeth; so his nod was stiffer than
he'd intended.
"Tak, you are going to head the shelter building project for us ... ?"
John's glasses flashed.
"Shit," Tak said, recalling Nightmare.
nOh, Tak ... ' Milly shook her head.
"I've been arguing with him all night," John said. "Hey." He looked
over at the picnic table. "Did Nightmare come by for the sru/I?"
"Yep." Brightly.
"Row is he?"
She shrugged-less bright.
He heard the harmonica, looked:
Back on her blanket, the other girl bent over her mouth harp. Her
hair was a casque of stained bronze around her lowered face. Her shirt
had slipped from one sharp shoulder. Frowning, she beat the mouth
holes on her palm once male. The notebook lay against her knee.
"Tak and me were up looking at the place I want to put the shelters.
You know, up on the rocks?"
"You've changed the location again?" Milly asked.
"Yeah,» Tak said. "He has. How do you like it around here, Kid? It's
a good place, huh?"
Prism, Mirror, Lens 35
"We'd be happy to have you," John said. "We're always happy to
have new people. We have a lot of work to do; we need all the willing
hands we can gel." His tapping palm clove to his thigh, stayed.
He to shake something loose in his throat. "I think I'm
going to wander on. II
"Oh ... ' Milly sounded disappointed.
"Come on. Stay for breakfast." Jolm sounded eager. "Then try out
one of our work projects. See which one you like. You don't know what
you're gonna find in 'em."
"Thanks, n he said, "I'm gonna go ... "
"I'll take him back down to the avenue," Tak said. "Okay, so long,
you guys."
"If you change your mind," Milly called (John was beating his leg
again), "you can always come back. You might want to in a couple of
days. Just come. We'll be glad to have you then, too."
On the concrete path, he said to Tak: "They're really good people,
huh? I just guess I ... " He shrugged.
Tak grunted: "Yeah."
"The scorpions-is that some sort of protection racket they make
the people in the commune pay?"
"You could call it that. But then, they get protected."
"Against anything else except scorpions?"
Tak grunted again, hoarsely.
He recognized it for laughter. "I just don't want to get into anything
like that. At least not on that side."
"I'll take you back down to the avenue, Kid. It goes on up into the
city. The stores right around here have been pretty well stripped of
food. But you never know what you're gonna luck out on. Frankly,
though, I think you'll do beller in houses. But there you take
chances: Somebody just may be waiting for you with a shotgun. LIke
I say, there's maybe a thousand left out of a city of two million: Only
one out of a hundred homes should be occupied-not bad odds. Only
I come near walking in on a couple of shotguns myself. Then you got
your scorpions to worry about ... John'S group?" The hoarse, gravelly laughter had a drunken quality the rest of Tak's behavior belied. "I
like them. But I wouldn't want to stick around them too much eIther.
I don't. But I give them a hand. And it's not a bad place to get your bearings from ... for a day or two."
"No. I guess not .. 0" But it was a mulling "no."
Tak nodded in mute agreement.
This park is alive with darknesses, textures of silence. Tak's boot
36 Dhalgym
heels tattoo the way. I can envision a dotted line left after him. And
someone might pick the night up by its edge, tear it along the perforations, crumple it, and toss it away.
Only two out of forty-some park lights (he'd started equnting) were
working. The nights overcast masked all hint of dawn. At the next
working light, within Sight of the lion-flanked entrance, Tak took his
hands OUt of his pockets. Two pioheads of light pricked the darkness
somewhere above his sandy upper lip. "If you want-you can come
back to my place ... ?"
5
" ... Okay."
Tak let out a hreath-"Good-" and turned. His face went completely black. "This way."
He followed the zipper jiogles with a staggering lope. Boughs, black
over the path, suddenly pulled from a sky gone grey ioside a V of receding rooftops.
As they paused by the lions, looking down a wide street, Tak rubbed
himself inside his jacket. "Guess we're about to get into morning."
"Which way does the sun come up?"
Loufer chuckled. "I know you won't believe they walked
again-"but when I first got here, I could have swam the light always
started over there." As they stepped from the curb, he nodded to the
left. "But like you can see, today its gelling light-" he gestured in front
of them-"there."
"Because the seasons changing?"
"I don't think its changed that much. But maybe. n Tak lowered his
head and smiled. "Then agaio, maybe 1 just wasn't paying attention.'
"Which way is east?" .
"Thats where its getting light. n Tak nodded ahead. "But what do
you do if it gets light in a different place tomorrow?"
"Come on. You could tell by the stars."
"You saw how the sky was. Its been like that or worse every night.
And day. I haven't seen stars since I've been here-moons or suns
either. "
but-"
"I've thought, maybe: It's not the season that changes. Its us. The
whole city shi£ts, turns, rearranges itself. All the time. And rearranges
us ... " He laughed. "Hey, I'm pulling your leg, Kid. Come on." Tak
Prism, Mirror, Lens 37
rubbed his stomach agaio. "You take it all too seriously." Stepping up
the curb, Tak pushed his hands into his leather pockets. "But I'm
damned if! wouldn't have sworn morning used to start over there."
Again he nodded, with pursed lips. "All that means is 1 wasn't paying
attention, doesn't it?" At the next corner he asked: "What were you in
a mental hospital fad"
"Depression. But it was a long time ago."
"Yeah?"
"I was hearing voices; afraid to go out; I couldn't remember thiogs;
some hallucinations-the whole bit. It was right after I finished my
first year of college. When I was nineteen. , used to drink a lot, too."
"What did the voices say?"
He shrugged. "Nothing. Singing ... a lot, but in some other language. And calling to me. It wasn't like you'd hear a real voice-"
"It was ioside your head?"
"Sometimes. When it was singing. But there'd be a real sound, like
a car startiog, or maybe somebody would close a door in another room:
and you'd thiok somebody had called your name at the same time.
Only they hadn't. Then, sometimes you'd thiok it was just in your
mind when somebody had; and not answer. When you'd find out,
you'd feel all uncomfortable."
'" bet you would."
"Actually, I felt uncomfortable about all the time ... But, really, that
was years hack."
"What did the voices call you-when they called?"
At the middle of the next block, Tak said:
1ust thought it might work. If I snuck up on it.'
"Sorry." Tbe clumsiness and sincerity of Taks amateur therapy made
him chuckle. "Not that way."
"Got any idea why it happened? I mean why you got-depressed,
and went into the hospital io the first place?"
"Sure. When I got out of high school, upstate, I had to work for a
year before I could go into college. My parents didn't have any money.
My mother was a full Cherokee ... though it would have been worth
my life to tell those kids back in the park, the way everybody goes on
about Indians today. She died when I was about fourteen. I'd applied
to Columbia, io New York City. 1 had to have a special interview because even though my marks in high school were good, they weren't
great. I'd come down ,to the city and gotten a job in an art supply
house-that impressed hell out of them at the interview. So they dug
38 Dhalgren
up this special scholarship. At the end of the first term I had all BI; and
one j).......in linguistics. By ,the end of the second term, though, I didn't
know what was going to happen the next year. I mean about money. I
couldn't do anything at Columbia except go to school. They've got all
sorts of extracurricular stuff, and it costs. If that D had been an A, I
might have gotten another scholarship. But it wasn't. And like I said,
I really used to drink. You wouldn't believe a nineteen-year-old could
drink like that. Much less drink and get anything done. Just before fi.
nals I had a breakdown. I wouldn',t go outside. I was scared to see pea.
pIe. I nearly killed myself a couple of times. I don't mean suicide. Just
with stupid thiDgs. Like climbing out on the window ledge when I waS
really drunk. And once I knocked a radio into a sink full of dishwater.
Like that." He took a breath "It was along time ago. None of that stuff
bothers me, reaRy, any more."
"You Catholic?"
"Naw. Dad was a liule ballsy, blue-eyed Georgia Methodist-" that
memorys vividness surprised him "when he was anything. We
never lived down south, though. He waJ in the Air Force most of the
time when I was a kid. Then he flew private planes for about a year. After
that he didn't do much of anything. But that was after Mom died ... "
"Funny." Tak shook his head in self.reproach; "The way you just as.
sume all the small, dark·complected brothers are Catholic. Brought up
a Lutheran, myself. What'd you do after the hospital?"
"Worked upstate for a while. DVR-Division of Vocational Reha.
bilitation-was going to help me get back in school, soon as I got out
of HiBside. But I didn't want to. Took a jOyride with a friend once that
ended up with me spending most of a year cutting trees in Oregon. In
Oakland I worked as a grip in a theater. Wasn't I telling you about ...
No, that was the girl in the park. I traveled a lot; worked on boats. I
tried school a couple more times, just on my oWn-once, in Kansas,
for a year, where I had a job as a super for a student building. Then
again in Delaware.'
"How far on did you get?"
"Did fine the first term, each place. Fucked up the second. I didn't
have another breakdown or anything. I didn't even drink. I just fucked
up. I don't fuck up onjobs, though. Just school. I work. I travel. I read
a lot. Then I travel some more:Japan. Down to Australia-though that
didn't come out too well. Bumming boats down around Mexico and
Central Americ", " He laughed. "So you see, I'm not a nut. Not a real
one, anyway. I haven't been a real nut in a long time."
Prism, Mirror, Lens 39
"You're here, aren't you?" Tak's Germanic face (with its oddly Ne·
groid nose) mocked gently. "And you don't know who you are."
"Yeah, but that's just 'cause I can't remember my-"
"Home again, home again." Tak turned into a doorway and mount·
ed the wooden steps; he looked back just before he reached the top
one. "Come on.O
There was no lamp post on either corner.
At the end of the block, a car had overturned in a splatter of glass.
Nearer, two trucks sat on wheelless hubs-a Ford pickup and a GM
cab-windshields and windows smashed. Across the street, above the
loading porch, the butcher hooks swung gently on their awning tracks.
"Are we going in the way you came out ... ?"
The smoke around the building tops was luminous with dawn.
"'Don't worry; I) Tak grt-nned. "You'll get used to it. 11
"I remembered you being on the other side of the ... ' He looked
across, again, at the .three·foot concrete platform that stretched beneath
the awning along the building opposite.
"Come on.' Tak took another step. "Oh-One thing. You'll have to
park your weapon at the door." He pointed vaguely at the orchid.
"Don't take offense. It's just a house rule."
'Oh, sure. Yeah.' He followed Tak up the steps. "Here, JUSt a second."
"Put it behind there." Tak indicaled two thick asbestos·covered
pipes inside the doorway. "!t'll he there when you come back."
He unsnapped the wrist band, slipped his fingers from the harness,
bent to lay the contraption on the floor behind the pipes.
Tak, already at the head of a dim stairwell, started down.
He stood up and hurried after.
"Fifteen steps.' Tak was already invisible below him. "It's pretty
dark so you better count.' .
There was no bannister so he kept one hand on the wall. His wrist
prickled where the orchid's collar had been. Hairs, drying now, pulled,
tickling, from his skin. Every other step his bare foot hit the stair edge,
heel on gritty marble, ball and toes hanging. Taks boots thudded below
... Thirteen ... fourteen ... The last step still surprised him.
"Back this way.·
He followed .through the dark. The cement under his bare foot was
very warm.
The steps ahead changed timbre. "Steps up now ... '
He slowed.
« •• • don't get lost. D
40 Dhalgren
This time he found a raiL
He could anticipate landings from the variations in Laufer's gait.
Mter the third flight, faint lines near head height indicated doors.
Rhythm is the only thing secure. In this darkness, rising, I recall the
Pacific stars. This ritual ascendance goes on in a city that has erased
them and blurred its sun out ahogether. Iron Wolf has something. 1
want it without the bother of definitions. The dangerous illumination,
the light in the exploding eye, is not for this other City.
"Last flightThey had come up nine landings.
U ........ and here we are. ,.
A metal door grated in its frame.
As Tak stepped before him onto the tarred roof, he turned his head
away from the cloud-colored dawn. After darkness, it was stiD too
bright. Face scrunched against the light, he stopped on the sill, one
hand on the jamb, the other holding back the ribbed and riveted door.
Smoke lay waist-high on the air.
He relaxed his face, blinking a lot.
Beyond the brick balustrade, roofs and roofs checkered into the
mist. The gap, there, must have been the park. Beyond it was a hill,
scaly with housing. "Jesus." He squinted in the other direction. "I
didn't realize this place was so far from the bridge. I'd just come off it
when you called to me down in the street."
Tak chuckled. "No, you'd wandered preny far."
"1 can just get a glimpse-" he stood on tiptoe-"of the river." And
lowered himself. "r thought it was just two, three blocks away."
Tak's chuckle became a full laugh. "Hey. how'd you lose one sandal?"
"Huh1" He looked down. "Oh •.. I was being chased. By dogs."
That sounded funny. too; so he laughed. "Yeah, I really was." He
picked up his foot, rested it above his knee to examine the caked and
calloused sole. The horny edge was cracked both sides. His ankle,
knob and hollow, was grit-grey. Heel, ball, instep, and each dusty toe
were gun-'barrel hlack. He wiggled his toes: grit ground. "I guess it
was-" He looked up frowning-"maybe a couple of days ago-" and
put his foot down. ''It was about three o'clock. In the morning. It was
raining. No cars. So I took a nap on somebody's porch. About five,
when it was getting light, I went back out on the road to hitch. But it
was still raining. So I figured, hell, I'd go back and calch another hour
or two, 'cause there weren't any cars. ODly when I got back, there was
this damn dog, who'd been sleeping under the porch all the time I'd
Prism, MiTTClr, Lens 41
been snoozing topSide. He was awake now. And he started barking.
Then he chased my ass down to the road. I ran. He ran. My sandal
broke and went into a ditch somewhere-I just about didn't notice.
While I was running, this old blue car pulled up-big old lady driving,
with her skinny husband, and the back seat full of children. I jumped
in out of the rain, and we drove right across the border, into Louisiana!
They were all off to spend the day with some other kid of hers who was
at some army base." He stepped from the sill. "Bought me a good
breakfast, 100." The door creaked closed behind him. "But I guess that's
when I first noticed I couldn't remember my name. She asked me for
it and I couldn't tell her ... But I don't think I've known it for a long,
long time." And he was almost used to the light. "I mean, you don't go
around thinking about yourself by your own name, do you? Nobody
does-unless somebody calls to you by it, or asks you what it is. I
haven't been around people who know me for ... for a while now. It's
just something I haven't thought of for a long time, and somehow it's
. .. I guess just slipped my mind." He looked at the tops of his feet
again, both filthy. one crossed with straps, one bare. "It doesn't bother me. Missing a sandal, I mean. I go barefoot a lot of the time."
"Like a hippie]"
He shrugged. "Yeah, when I'm in a hippie-type town." Again he
looked around the misty horizon. "You sleep up here?"
"Come on." Tak turned. A breeze swung one jacket flap from his
belly. pressed the other against him, neck to hip. "That's my house."
1t had probably been built as a maintenance shack, put on the roof
for tool storage. Bamboo curtains backed recently puttied panes. The
door-tar paper had ripped in one place from greyed pine-was ajar.
They walked around a skylight. Tak hit the door with his hand-heel.
{Like he expected to surprise somebody. .. n The door swung in. Tak
stepped inside: click. Lights went on. "Come on, make yourself at
home.1I
He followed the engineer across the sill. "Hey. this is pretty nice!"
Tak stooped to peer into a crackling kerosene heater. "It's comfortable ... now I know I didn't walk out of here and leave this thing going.
Someday I'm gonna come back home and find this whole place just a
pHe of ashes-of course, in Bellona that could happen whether I left it
on or not." He stood up, shaking his head. "It gelS a little chilly here
in the morning. I might as well leave it go."
·Christ, you've got a lot of books! "
Shelves covered the back wall, floor to ceiling, filled with paperbacks.
42 Dhalgren
And: "Xs that a short wave setup 1"
'Part of one. The rest is in the next room. 1 could just sit in bed and
CQ all over the place-if 1 could get anything but static. The interference around this place is something terrible. Then, it may be something's wrong with my set. I've got my Own power supply: a couple of
dozen acid batteries in the back. And a gasoline charger." He stepped
to the desk in the corner, shrugged his jacket down the gold rug of his
back, and hung it on a waH hook. (He still wore his cap.) Blurred in
blond, his forearm bore a dragon, his bicep some naval insignia. On
one shoulder, a swastika had been tattooed, then, not very efficiently.
removed. "Have a seat." Tak pulled a swivel chair from the desk, turned
it around, and sat. Knees wide, he slid his haRd under his belt to
arrange himself where his genitals bagged the denim. "Take the bed .•.
An incongruous fur throw lay on the board floor. An India print
draped down over what he thought was a daybed. But when he sat on
it, he realized it was just a very thin mattress On the top of some builtout cabinet: or at any rate, just plank. Still, the place looked comfortable. "You're doing a little better than those kids in the park."
Tak grinned, took off his cap, and dropped it on the desk blotter. "I
guess 1 am. But then, thats not too difficult." The military short hair
jarred with his unshaven jaw.
The desk, except for the cap, was bare.
Shelves above it held binoculars, slide rules, drafting compasses and
pens, two pocket calculators, French curves and templates, colored
pentels, several cut and polished geodes, a row of ornamental daggers
on display stands, a pile of plastic parts boxes, a soldering gun ...
"Hey ... " Tak slapped one knee. "I'm gonna make some coffee. Got
some canned ham, too. Real good ham. And bread.· He stood up and
went to a door, bung, like the windows, with tan splints. "You just
relax. Take it easy. Take your clothes off and sttetch out, if you want.·
By his boot, the bubbling heater picked out what still glowed in the
scuffed leather. "I'll be back in a minute. Glad you like the place. I do
too." He ducked thIough bamboo.
On one wall (he had only glanced till now) Were thIee, yard.high,
full color, photographic posters:
On one, some adolescent weightJi{ter, Germanic as Tak, wearing
only boots and a denim jacket with no sleeves, leaned against a motorcycle, stubby hands flat against his naked legs.
On the second, a muscular black, in what could have been Tak's
Prism, Mirror, Lens 43
jacket, cap, and boots, stood against some indistinct purple background, legs wide, one fist before bared thigh, one against his bare hip.
On the third, a dark youth-Mexican or Indian perhaps?- shirtless and shoeless, sat on a boulder under a stark, blue sky. his jeans
pushed down to his knees.
Their bared genitals were huge.
The photographs had been taken from crotch level, too, to make
them look even larger.
From the other room he heard pans clinking; a cabinet opened and
closed.
By the head of the bed, on a table near a tensor lamp, books were
piled irregularly:
A bunch on the Hell's Angels: Thompson, and ReyooldsIMcClure;
four cheaply bound, two·dollar paperbacks: Angels on Wheels, and
Weekend in Hell, a True Story of the Angels as Told by Millicent Brashhe read the first paragraph of ill-lined type, shook his head, and put it
down. A book called Bike Bitch was apparently the sequel to (same
cover/different author) Bike Bastard. Under that was The Poems of Rimbaud, with English at the bottom of the pages; then a paperback Selected Letters of Keats; next, Dickey's Deliverance; a green, hard-covered
book oflogs and trigonometric functions, place held by a white enamel,
cin:u1ar slide rule. there was sundry science fiction by Russ (something
called The Female Man), Zelazny. and Disch. The last book he picked
up had a purple and gold reproduction of a Leonor Fini for cover: Evil
Companions. He opened it in the middle, read from the top of the lefthand page to the bottom of the right, closed it, frowning, went to the
bamboo, and pushed it aside.
'You ever see one of these in somebody's house before?" Tak
thumped the grey cabinet with his elbow. "Its a Micro Wave oven.
They're great. You can roast a whole rib roast in ten, twenty minutes.
They cost about six hundred dollars. At least that's what the price tag
said in the store 1 lifted this one from. Only 1 don't like to run it because it uses up so much power. Someday. though, I'm gonna give a
dinner party for thirty or forty people. Hold it outside on the roof. For
all my friends in the city. I'll knock their eye out with what this thing
can do." He turned to the counter.
On two burners of a three-burner camp stove, pale flames from
canned heat licked an enameled coffeepot and an iron skillet. Along
the back of the counter were several gdlons of wine, white and red,
and a dozen bottles of whiskeys, liqueurs, and brandies. "This is sort
44 Dhalgren
of my work room." Back muscles shifted under hairy flesh. "Probably
spend more here than in the front.» More bookshelves here; more
shortwave components; a work bench slagged with solder, strewn with
spaghetti wire, bits of pegboard in which dozens of small, colorful transistors, resistors, and capacitors had been stuck; several disassembled
chassis. A single easy-chair, with stuffing pushing between worn
threads across the arms, made the rOom cluttered. Above the tin sink,
the bamboo had been pushed back from the glass. (The putty can stood
open on the sill, a kitchen knife stuck in it; the panes were spotlesssave a few puttied fingerprints.) Outside, two pairs of jeans and a lot
of socks hung from a line. "You looking for the john, Kid? I just use
the roof. Theres a coffee can upside down outside with a roll of tonet
paper under it. Theres no drain. Everything goes right over the edge."
"Naw, thats okay." He stepped through. Bamboo clicked and clicked
behind him. "r guess here-in a place like Bellona-you can have
about anything you want. I mean, you just walk in and take it out of
stores and things."
'Oniy-" Tak put a handful of something in the skill.et-"r don't
want very much." Steam, hissing, made the room smell, and sound,
very good. "Figured while I was at it I'd make us up a full breakfast.
I'm starved. '"
"Yeah ... " At the pungence of thyme and fennel, the space beneath
his tongue flooded. "I guess if you liked you could live here about as
well as you wanted." And rosemary _ ..
On a cutting board by the stove, a loaf of mahogany-colored bread
sat among scallered crumbs. "Fresh food is hard as hell to come by.
Meat especially. But theres canned stuff in the city enough to last ... "
Tak frowned back over his hirsute shoulder. "Truth is, I don't know
how long it'll last. llucked Out on a couple of pretty well-stocked places
nobody else seems to have found yet. You'll discover, hyand large, people are not very practical around here-if they were, I guess they
wouldn't be here. But when somebody else eventually does stumble on
one of my classified, top-secret, hush-hush food sources, in a place like
Bellona you can't very well say, 'Go away or I'll cdl the cops.' There
aren't any cops to call. Have a piece of bread. Another thing I lucked
out on: Ran into this woman who bakes loaves and loaves of stuff every
week; just gives it away to anyone who comes by. For some reason I do
not quite understand, she won't use any sugar or sait, so, good as it
looks, it takes a bit of getting used to. But its mHng. She lives in the
Lower Cumherland Park area-talk about nuts. She's very nice and I'm
Prism, Mirror, L<ns 45
glad I know her, but she visits all sorts of people, many of whom are
simply not in." Tak finished cutting a slice, turned and held it out.
"Margarine's over there; haven't found any frozen butter for a while.
Good plum preserves, though. Homemade in somebody:' cellar last
fall."
He took the hread, picked up a kitchen knife, and removed the top
Hom a plastic butter dish.
"That should hold you till breakfast, which-" Tak swirled a spatula
in the skillet-"is three minutes off."
Under the jelly and the margarine, bread crumbled on his tongue,
oddly flat. Still, it goaded his appetite.
Chewing, he looked through the newspapers piled to one side of the
cluttered workbench.
BELLONA TIMES
Saturday, Aprill, 1919
BELLONA TIMES
Wednesday, December 25, 1933
BELLONA TIMES
Thursday, December 25, 1940
BELLONA TIMES
Monday, December 25,1879
The headline for that one:
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
QUITS MONTEREY FOR FRISCO!
"Calkins has a thing for Christmas?"
"That was last week," Tak said. "A couple back, every other issue
was 1984."
The next half dozen papers went fromJuly 14, 2022, to July 7, 1837
(Headline: ONLY ONE HUNDRED YEARS TILL THE DEATH
OF HARLOW!)
"It's a real event when he brings out two papers with consecutive
dates. They're never two in a row with the same year. But sometimes
he slips up and Tuesday actually follows Wednesday-or do I have that
backward? Well, rmjuS! surprised people don't take bets; trying 10
pick thenexi date for the TImes could be the Bellona equivalent to playing the numbers. Oh, he:s got real news in there-articles on evacuation problems, scorpions terrorizing remaiBing citizens, what's happening in the poorer communities, pleas for outside help-even an
occasional personality article on newcomers.' Tak gave him a knowing nod. "You read it; but it's the only paper around 10 read. I read it
up here. John, Wally, Mildred, Jommy-they read it down in the park.
Still, it makes me incredibly hungry to see a real paper, you know? Just
to find out how the rest of the world is getting on without us."
Did Tak's voice veer, once more, toward that unsettling tone? Only
by suggestion. he realized, and realized too: The longer he stayed, the
less of that tone he would hear. Wbatever request for complicity, in
whatever labyrinth of despair, it made of the listener, whatever demand
for relief from situations which were by definition unrelievable, these
requests, these demands could only be made of the very new to such
labyrinths, such situations. And time, even as he munched flat bread,
was erasing that status. "The rest of the country, it's fine."
Tak turned, ·with the knife.
He jumped, even though he knew Fire Wolf was only in the midst
of some domestic slicing. 'Yesterday, I think it was: I got a ride with a
guy who had an L.A. paper in his car. Nothing's wrong on the West
Coast. Then later, two women picked me up; and they had a Philadelphia paper. The Eastern Seaboard's all okay." He looked down at the
papers on the bench again, watched his thick, nail-gnawed fingers grub
there, leaving crumbs, margarine tracks, jelly stains. "This is the only
place where ... ' He shrugged, wondering ifTak took his news as good,
bad; or even believed it. " ... I guess."
"Wby don't you pour some coffee?" Tak said.
"Okay." He stepped around the armchair, lifted the enameled pot
from the burner; the handle stung his knuckle as he poured.
In the cups, one after another, glistening disks rose, black without
translucence.
"We'll eat inside." Above the plates of eggs, ham, and bread, two
amber ponies rose on the tray between Tak's gripping tbmbs. As Tak
turned to the bamboo, the brandies ran with light.
Inside, Sitting on the bed again, he lay his plate on his clamped knees
till it burned. Lifting it by one edge. then the other, he speared ham
chunks from the gravy, or pushed them on his fork with his thumb.
"It's amazing what Worcestershire will do for dehydrated eggs," Tak
said through a mouthful of food, "thank God."
He bit a tiny die of garlic; in his stinging mouth the scrambled flavors bloomed; the confusion of ,tastes recalled many good things, but
gave no basic flavor (his plate was half clean already) to which he could
fIX his tongoe.
"Since this is supper as well as breakfast-' seated at the desk, Tak
poured himself another glass-"r guess brandy is all right."
He nodded, the amber bulb lost in his outsized fingers. "It's really
good." He looked back at his plate and wished there was a vegetable;
even some lettuce.
"You have any plans where you'll go?" Tak finished his second pony,
poured another, and extended the bottle.
He shook his head to the drink and shrugged at the question.
"You can catch some sleep here."
Idly, he thought: Artichokes. Then he looked at the posters. "You're
really into the Sand M thing, huh?" He hoped the food in his mouth
would muddle the comment.
"Mmm?" Tak's coffee chattered as he sipped. "It depends on who
I'm with." He put his cup on the desk, opened the side drawer, reached
in: "You ever seen one like this?"
It was an orchid.
The blades, twice as long as his had been, with greater curve, were
brass. On the ornate band, brass leaves, shells, and claws gripped the
bases of the damasked knives.
Tak placed the points around his left nipple, pressed, winced-let
the weapon drop to his lap. "Not your thing, huh?" In the yellow hair,
flushed points ringed his breast. "It's a beautiful object.· He smiled,
shook his head, and put it back in the drawer.
"Can I put my brandy in my coffee?"
"You can do anything you like.'
"Oh, yeah." He spilled the glass over the steaming black. "Uh ...
thanks." He raised the cup. Brandy fumed about his race. A deep breath
made his tongue stagger in his "It's a very nice breakfast."
Squinting eyes observed his from beyond the cup's bottom.
He drank, set the cup on the floor, thumbed the last of the ham onto
his fork; still chewing, he set the plate down by the cup.
"More brandy?"
"No, thanks.1'I
"Come on." Tak poured himself a third glass. "Relax. Take your
shirt off."
He had known what was coming since he'd accepted the invitation
in the park. Another time, he would have had some feelings about it.
48 Dhalgren
But feelings were muted in mm; things had drifted to this without his
really considering. He tried to think of something to say, couldn't, so
unbuttoned the three bmtons, puHed the tails from his pants.
Tak raised his eyebrows at the optical chain. "Where'd you get that?"
"On my way here."
·Outside the city?"
"It says 'Made in Brazil' ... I think. "
Tak shook his head. "Bellona has become a city of strange-" he burlesqued the word with a drawl- ·craftsmen. Ab, the notions that are
engineered here! Orchids, light-shields, that chain you're weariogour local folk art."
"I'm not going to take it ·off!" The conviction surprised him; its artieulation astounded him.
Tak laughed. "I wasn't going to ask you to." He looked down at his
chest, ran his forefinger, in the hair, from one pink dot to the nextstill visible where he'd pressed the orchid prongs. "You've got Some
nerve thinking you were ever any crazier than anybody else.»
His shirt lay beside him on the bed. He pulled his hands together
into his lap, fingers and knuckles twisted around one anotherscratched his dark, creased stomach with his thumb. "Look, about ...
being nulS." He felt self-righteous and shy. looked at the dOUbled fist
of flesh, hair, horn and callous pressed into his groin; it suddenly
seemed weighted with the bones in it. "You're not, and you never have
been. That means what you see, and hear, and feel, and think ... you
think that is your mind. But the real mind is invisible: you're less
aware ofit, while you think, than you are of your eye while you see
... until something goes wrong with it. Then you become aware of it,
with all its dislocated pieces and its rackety functioning, the same way
you become aware of your eye when you get a cinder in it. Because it
hurts . .. Sure, it distorts things. But the strange thing, the thing that
you can. never explain to anyone, except another nut, or, if you're
lucky. a doctor who has an unusual amount of sense-stranger than
the hallUCinations, or the voices, or the anxiety-is the way you begin
to experience the edges of the mind itself . .. in a way other people
just can't." He pushed his shirt down to the foot of the bed, pushed
his sandal free of his foot with his other toes. ·You see?" He waS far
more conscious of the texture of the floorboards with the foot that had
been bare.
"All right." Takspoke gently and appeasingly. "Why don't you take
the rest of your clothes am"
Prism, Mirror, Lens 49
"Look, I'm awfully dirty. man-' He raised his eye. "I probably stink
like hell. If you don't want-"
"r know just what you stink like," Tak said. "Go on.»
He took a breath, suddenly found it funny, lay back on the hard pallet, unhooked his belt, and closed his eyes.
He heard Tak grunt. One, then another boot, thumped on the floor
and fell over.
A moment later a warm hip pressed his. Palms and fingers pressed
his stomach; the fingers spread. Tak slid his hands to the jeans' waist,
tugged.
Heels and shoulders pressed on the hard pad, he raised his buttocks.
Takslid the jeans down, and-"Jesus Christ, man! the matter with you-that stuff all over your diek!"
"What ... huh?" He opened his eyes, propped his elbows under
him, looked down at himself. "What do you ... ?" Then he grioned.
"Nothing's the matter. What's the matter with you?"
"You got dandruff in your crotch?"
not dandruff. I was with a woman. Just before r met you.
Only I didn't get a chance to wash."
·Was she sick?"
"Naw. Didn't you ever fuck a woman?"
Tak had a strange expression. "I'll be honest: r can count the attempts on the fingers of one hand.» He narrowed his already thin
mouth.
"If my God-damn feet don't turn you off, sure not goiog to hurt
you!" He reached to brush off his rough groin hair. "It's just like dried
... cum or something." rhe chain glittered acrass it. "It happens with
some women, when they're very wet. It's nothing wrong." He stopped
brushing, let himself back down on his elbows. "I bet it turns you on."
Tak shook his head, then laughed.
"Go ons n he said.
rak lowered his head, looked up once with bright blue eyes: "It
turns you on, doesn't it?"
He reached down for the hairy shoulder, pressed: "Go on."
Thick arms joined under his Waist. Once Tak, twice-full fist between
their groins, ground his stubbed chin against his neck. He pushed Tak
away; the chunky head rolled down his chest and belly. The heated ring
of Tak's mouth rell down his cock; his cock engOlged; the ring rose; and
fell down again. Tak's forehead butted low on his stomach. He had to
cross his ankles and strain, his mouth opeIi, his eyes closed, the chain
50 Dhalgren
tightening on his chest. Think of her, it would be easy. (Tak's face
pressed glass bits into his groin hair.) The insides of his lids were
moon-silvered, run with cracks like branches. A memory of blowing
leaves suddenly became hair moving from her face, eyes clamped,
mouth taking tiny breaths. He gasped at the welling heat, and came. A
moment later Tak raised his head, grunted, 'Yeah ... " and moiled his
wet, sensitive genitals.
He clamped his teeth.
Tak elbowed up beside him, turned on his back.
His forehead pressed Tak's arm. From his left eye, Lourer's chest was
a heaving meadow. (His right was closed against flesh.) "You want me
to do anything?" He didn't feel like doing anything. He was tired.
Tak scooped up his head and pulled it against him.
Chest hair ran between his fingers.
"Bite my tit," Tak said. "The right One. Hard."
·Okay. Where is ... .? Oh." He gripped the knoblet in his teeth.
Tak pushed his hand to the outsized scrotum, squeezed his fingers
to the full, wrinkled flesh. "Go on. Really hard .•
Tak's nst fell and fell on his hand heel. It took a long time.
He ground Tak's nipple in his teeth, chin and nose rubbing in hair.
He squeezed Tak's testicles a rew times, tightening his grip as much as
he could; Tak's rhythm qUickened. And his own mouth was sahy; he
didn't want to see if it was blood.
Something hot spattered his hip and rolled down between them. He
let go, with teeth and fingers, closed his eyes, and turned over. A heavy
arm slid around his chest. Tak's chin knocked his shoulder a few times
seeking a position on the thin pilloW; he sqoeezed Tak's forearm, once,
leaned sleepily, and comfortably, into the cradle of Tak's body.
And slept.
Now and again, he felt Tak turning and turning on the Single bed.
Once he awoke fully to a hand rubbing his shoulder; but slept again
before the motion halted. At one point he was aware that Tak was not
in the bed; at another, felt him climbing back in. Through it all, he had
not moved, but lay facing the wall, lids closed, head on his forearm,
one knee drawn up, one foot off the mattress bottom, surfacing and
submerging in sleep.
Later, he woke with heat behind his groin. As he blinked, sexuality resolved into an urge to pee. He rolled to his back, pushed himself
to his elbows.
Loufer, probably unable to get comfortable with two in so cramped
Prism, Mirror, Lens 51
a space, sat deep in the swivel chair, knees wide, head lolling forward
on one matted shoulder, hands curled on snarled thighs.
Plate on the books scattered on the table; plate and coffee cup
on the floor, as well as Tak's boots, his own sandal, and both their
pants-the room, before fairly neat, looked disordered.
When he Sat up, his foot carried the print spread to the floor.
There was no sheet on the mattress pad. Rings of stain overlapped on
the ticking. He kicked the cloth loose, looked at the chain fastened
on his ankle, spiraling his calf, groin, stomach, and thigh ... He
touched, in the hollow of his collarbone, the catch fastening the chain
around his neck. He extended his arm, turned it back and forth: light
jumped from glass to glass at the loops there,joined around his wrist.
Then he hunched to examine one of the mirrors against his belly: it
was silvered on both sides. Bent over, on the bed, he felt his bladder
burn.
He stood up, went out the door.
Warm.
Grey.
Smoky gauzes lore on his body as he walked toward the balustrade.
He dug two horny fingers at the inner corners of his eyes for sleep
grains. The retaining wall hit him mid-thigh. Without looking down,
he let his water go. It arched away, perfectly silent, while he wondered
if the·re was any traffic ...
From a building a block away, astounding billows raised a lopsided
tower.
Finished, he leaned across the splattered stone.
the alley was a torrent of grey in which he could see no bottom.
ticking bis coated teeth, he walked back 10 the shack, stepped sideways through the tar-papered door: "Hey, you can have your bed back;
l'mgonna ... "
In the shadowed room, Taks chest rose evenly in a subvocal growl.
"I'm going to go now . . .• but spoke it more softly; he took a few
steps toward the naked engineer, asleep in the chair.
Tak's long toes spread the boards. Between his knuckles, a stumpy
cock with its circumsized helmet was nearly hidden in hair above a
long, heavy scrotum rivaling those on the posters. The Single belly
crease, just above his navel, smoothed with each breath.
He looked for scab at the nipple; there was none.
"Hey, I'm gonna go ..• " The desk drawer was slightly open; inside,
in shadow; brass glinted.
52 Dhalgren
He leaned down to look at Tak's slack lips, the broad nostrils flaring each breathAnd his teeth jarred together. He stepped back, wanted to go forward, stepped back again: his heel hit a calfee cup-cold coffee spread
around his foot. He snll didn't look away.
In his lowered face, Tak's eyes were wide.
Without white or pupil, the balls were completely crimson.
Mouth still closed, he heard himself make a mumed roar.
His left flank glittered with gooseflesh.
He did look again, leaning forward violently. ahuost hitting Taks knee.
Loufer continued his quiet breathing, scarlet-eyed.
He backed away. stepped On wet fur, tried to work his throat loose.
Gooseflesh, at face, flank, and buttocks, crawled acrosS him.
He waS in his pants when he got outside. He stopped to lean on the
wall while he fumbled his sandal srrap closed. As he Sidestepped the
skylight, he punched one arm down one woolen sleeve, pulled back
the metal door and went into the dark well, working his other fist
down the other.
With darkness in his eyes, the red memory was worse thanth. discovery.
On the tlli<:d landing, he slipped, and fell, clutching the rail, the
whole next flight. And stHI did not slow. He made it through the corridors at the bottom (warm concrete under his baFe foot) on kinesthetic
memory. He tore up the bannisteriess stair, slapping at the wall, he
saw the door ahead, charged forward; he Came out under the awning,
running, and almost impaled himself on the dangling hooks.
Averting his face, he swung his arm against them-two clashed,
trundling away on their rails. At the Same time, his bare foot went alI
the porch's concrete edge.
For one bright instant, falling, he ,thought he was going to do a
belly-whop on the pavement, three feet down. Somehow, he landed in
a crouch, scraping one hand and both knees (the other hand waving
out for balance) before he pushed up. to stagger from the curb.
Gasping, he turned to look back up at the loading porch.
From their tracks. under the awning. the four- and six-foot butcher
hooks swung.
Blocks away, a dog barked. barked, barked again.
gasping, he turned. and started walking toward the corner,
sometimes with his sandaled foot on fhe curb. mostly with both in the
gutter.
Prism, Mirror; Lens 53
Nearly there, he stopped, raised his hand, stared at the steel blades
that curved from the plain wrist band to cage his twitching fingers. He
looked back at the loading porch, frowned; looked back at the orchid
on his hand: he relt the frown, from inside; a twisting in his facial flesh
he corud not control.
He remembered snatching up his pants. And his shirt. And his
sandal. He remembered going down the dark stair. He remembered
coming up and out on the porch, hitting at the hooks, and fallingBut nowhere in the past moments did he recall reaching behind two
asbestos-covered pipes, fitting his fingers through the harness, clamping the collar to his wrist ...
He reviewed: pants, shirt, sandal, the dark stair-down, across, up.
Light from the door; the racketing hooks; his stinging palm.
He looked at his free palm; scraped skin was streaked grey ... He
looked down the block. There were no vehicles anywhere on the
street ...
No. Go back.
Warm concrete under his foot. His sandal clacking. Slapping the
wall; coming up. Seeing the doorway. Seeing the pipes ... ! They were
on the left-hand side of the doorway. The blistered covering was bound
with metal bands! On the thicker one, near the ceiling, hadn't there
been some kind of valve? And had rushed past them, onto the concrete, nearly skewered himself; hit with his forearm-it was still sore.
He was faIling ...
He was turning; missed the curb, staggered, shook his head, looked
up.
The street sign on the corner lamppost said Broadway.
•... goes up into the city and ... ' Someone had said that. Tak?
But no ...
... seeing the light. Ran out the door. The hooks ...
The muscles in his face snarled on chin and cheekbones. Suddenly
tears' banked his eyes. He shook his head. Tears were on his cheek. He
started walking again, sometimes looking at one hand, sometimes at
the other. When he finally dropped his arms, blades hissed by one jean
thighuNo ... "
He said that out loud.
And kept walking.
Snatched his clothes from the floor, jammed his feet into his pants;
stopped just outside the shack (leaning against the tar-paper wall) for
54 Dhalgren
his sandal. Around the skylight; one sleeve. Into the dark; the other.
Running down steps-and he'd fallen once. Then the bOttom flight;
the warm corridor; coming up; slapping; he'd seen light before he'd
reached the top, turned, and Seen the day-bright doorway (the big pipe
and the little pipe to one side), run forward, out on the porch, beat at
the hooks; two trundled away as his bare foot went over. For one bright
moment, he fell- .
He looked at his hands, one free, one caged; he looked at the rubble around him; he walked; he looked at his hands.
A breath drained, roaring, between tight teeth. He took another.
he blurred block after blurred block, he heard the dog
agaIn, this time a howl, that twistedl rose, wavered, and ceased.
The Ruins of Morning
Here I am and am nO I. This circle in all, this change changing in wintedess, a dawn circle with an image of, an autumn change with a
change of mist. Mistake two pictures, one and another. No. Only in
seasons of shortlight, only on dead afternoons. I will not be sick again.
I will not. You are here.
He retreated down the halls of memory, seething.
Found, with floal and banal comfort-Mother?
Remembered the first time he realized she was two loches taller than
his father, and that some people thought it unusual. Hair braided, Mother was tolerant severity, was easier to play with than his father, was nips
to Albany, was laughter (was dead?) when they went for walks through
the park, was dark as old wood. More often, she was admonitions not
to wander away in the city, not to wander away lothe trees.
Father? A short man, yes; mostly lo uniform; well, not that shortback in the force again; away a lot. Where was Dad now? In one of
three cities, in one of two states. Dad was silences, Dad was noises, Dad
was absences that ended in presents.
"Come on, we'll play with you later. Now leave 1!IS alone, will you?"
Mom and Dad were words, 10Llying and jockeying in the small,
sunny yard. He listened and did not listen. Mother and Father, they
were a rhythm.
55
56 Dhalgren
He began to sing, "Annnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn ... '1) that had someof the fall of words around. "Annnnnnn- "
"Now what are you going on like that for?"
"Ain't seen your mom in two weeks. Be a good boy and take it somewhere else?»
So without stopping he look his AnnnnnDDDnn down the path beside the house where hedge-leaves slapped his lips and tickled them so
that he took a breath and his sound snagged on laughter.
ROAR and ROAR, ROAR: he looked up. The planes made ribs
across the sky. The silver beads snagged SUD. The window waH of his
house blinded mm so-"Annnnnnnn ... "-he made his noise and
gave it the sound of the planes all up and down the street, walking and
jogging with it, in his sneakers, and went down the steps at the side of
the street, crossed over. His sound buzzed all the mask of his face.
Shadows slid over him: he changed sound. Shadows slid away: he
changed it back. The sun heated the bony spots above his eyes; that
changed it again; and again, when the birds (he had wandered into the
woods that lapped like a great tongue five blocks into town; soon he
had been in them for a quarter of an hour) collided in the leaves, then
flung notes down. One note was near enough; he caught it with ms
voice and it thrust him toward another. Sun and chHI (spring had just
started) cuffed and pummeled him and he sang, getting pine needles
inside his canvas shoes (no socks) and the back of his neck tickling
from hair when the wind came.
He climbed the rocks: his breath made windy pauses in the sound
and that was interesting, so that when he reached the top he pushed
the leaves away and made each note as low as the green whisperThree of the five were naked.
Which stopped him.
And one girl was wearing only a little cross around her neck. The
silver tilted on the inner slope of One breast. She breathed.
He blinked and whispered another note.
Silver broke up the sun.
The man still in pants pushed one fist up into the foliage (pants undone, his belt lay free of halfilS loops, away from his hip), pushed his
other hand down to scratch, twisting his hips so that more and more,
strelching in the greenThe girl who was darker even than his mother rolled to her side:
someone else's yeHow hair fell from her back and spread. And her
hands on the man\; face were suddenly hidden by his hands on hers
(in the pile of clothing he recoguized another uniform, but blue-black
The Ruins of Morning 57
where his fathers was green) and she was moving against him now, and
there was a grass blade against her calf that slipped first one way. then
the other.
He held his breath, forgot he was holding it: then it all came out in
a surprising at-once that waS practically not a note at all. So he got
more air back in his lungs and began another.
"Hey. look!" from the other niked one, on elbows and laughing:
"We got company!" and pointing. .
So his sound, begun between song and sigh, ended in laughter; he
ran back through the brush, pulling a music from their laughing till
his was song again. He cantered down the path.
Some boys came lip the path (this part of the wood was traveled as
any park), thumbs in their jeans, hair all points and lines and slicks.
Two of them were arguing (also, he saw as they neared, one of the boys
was a girl), and one with carroty hair and small eyes glared at him.
He hunched, intently. and didn't look back at them, even though he
wanted to. They were bad kids, he decided. Dad had told him to stay
away from bad kids.
Suddenly he turned and sang after them, trying to make the music
stealthy and angular till it became laughter again. He had reached the
playground that separated the woods from town.
. He mixed his music with the shouting from the other side of the
fence. He rippled his fingers on the wire and walked and looked
through: Children clustered at the sliding board. But their scuffle had
turned to shouts.
Beyond. that were street sounds. He walked out among them and let
his song pick them up. Cars, and two women talking about money. and
something bang-banging in the big building with the corrugated walls:
emerging from that, foot-rhythms. (Men in construction-helmets
glanced at him.) That made him sing louder.
He walked up a hill where the houses got bigger, with lots of rock
between. Finally (he had been flipping his fingers along the iron bars
of the gate) he stopped to redly look in (now going Hummmm, and
hmmmmm, hmmmm, and hmmmmm) at the grass marked with tile
squares, and a house that was very big and mostly glass and brick. A
Woman sat between two oaks. She saw him, cocked her head curiously. sm-i·led-so he sang for her Ahhhhhhhhh-she frowned. He ran
down the street, down the hill, singing.
The houses weren't so big any more.
The ribs of day cracked on the sky. But he didn't look up at the
planes this time. And there were lots more people.
58 Dhalgren
Wmdows: and on top of the windows, signs: and on top of the signs,
things that turned in the wind: and on top of those, blue where wind
you couldn't see went-
"Hey, watch it"'""-"
He staggered back from a man with the dirtiest wrists he had ever
seen. The man repeated: "Watch where you're God-damn going-"to
nobOdy. and lurched away. He was going to turn and run down the next
street ...
The bricks were cracked. A plank had Come away from the window.
Trash heaped beside the door.
No wind, and warm; the street was loud with voices and machinery.
so loud he could hardly catch rhythm for his song.
His sounds-long and lolling over his tongue now-were low, and
he heard them under, not over, the noise.
"Hey. look out-"
"Whatthe-"
"Hey. did you see that'-"
He hadn't.
"What are you-"
People turned. Somebodyran past him close, slapping black moccasins on the stone.
"Those bastards from the reservation!»
"ThatS one oftheir kids, too."
He wasn't; and neither was his mother-she was from ... ? Anyway.
he tried to sing that too, but was worried now. He turned the corner
into an alley crowded with warm-weather loungers.
Two women, bony and delighted, stood in the doorway:
One: "Did you see that?"
The other laughed out loud.
He smiled; that changed his sound again.
From the next doorway. fat and ragged, face dirty as the drunkard's
wrists, she carried a cloth bag in one fist, with the other beat at the
trash. She turned, lumbering in the heap, blinked at him.
His music stuttered, but took it in. He hurried onto the avenue
dodged around seven nuns, started to run, but tluned to watch them:
They walked slowly and talked quickly. with sharp small voices.
Falls of white broke at breast and knee; black scuffed toes w.rinkled
white hems.
People stepped around them.
"Good morning) sisters. n
The Ruins of Morning 59
Sisters nodded and smiled, probably because it was afternoon. They
walked straight, brushing and brushing.
He tried to fit the rhythm of their walk into his music. He glanced
around the street, hurried on, making his sounds longer and longer;
hurried till he was running and each note took half a block.
Ran around another corner.
And all his breath came hissing between his teeth.
The man's palm lifted, his fingertips stayed down to draw wet lines
on the pavement, before he rolled over to show most of the-wound.
The one standing swayed and sweated. When the woman at the other
corner began to call Out, "Ohma'god! Ohma'god, he-e-elp!" the standingman ran.
He watched him run, and screamed, a little, twice.
The man on the street was grunting.
Someone running joggled him, and he stepped back, with another
sound; then he ran too and what had begun as music was now a wail.
He ran until he had to walk. He walked until he had to stop singing.
Then he ran again: Throat raw, he wailed again.
Once he passed a clutch of unshaven men; one painted at him, but
another put a bottle in the hand shucked with purple.
Heran.
He cried.
He cUt across the corner of the woods. He ran some more.
He ran on the wide street under a ribbon of evening. Lights came
on like twin necklaces suddenly unrolled down the avenue, traffic and
tail beacons between. He shrieked. And fled from the street because
people were looking.
This street was more familiar. Noise hurt his throat. Sharp lights in
his eyes; hedges marred with darkness. And he was roaring now-
"For sake-!"
He came up hard against her hands! Mother, and he tried to hug
her, but she was holding him back ..
"Where have you been? What is the matter with you, shouting
around in the street like that?"
This mouth snapped. Sound to deafen built behind his teeth.
·We've been looking for you nearly half the day!"
None of it escaped. He was panting. She to!'k his arm and led
him.
·Your father-" who was turning the corner now-"comes home
the first time in two weeks, and you decide to go running off!'
60 Dhalgren
"The« he is! Where did you find him!· and his father laughed and
that at least was some sound. But not his.
They received him with scolding affection. But more vivid waS the
scalding wergy he could not release. Wanting to cry; he had. been
silent, chewed OB. his knuckles, the heels of his palms, his cuticles, and
what was left of his nails. .
These memories intact solved as little as those riddled with gaps.
Still, he rose from them, reassured.
He hunted over for his name. Once, perhaps, his mother calliog, from across a street . ..
No.
And memory was discarded:
How can I say that that is my prize possession? (They do not fade,
neither those buildings nor these.) Rather what we know as real is
burned away at invisible heat. What we are concerned with is more
insubslantial. I do not know. It is as simple as that. For the hundred.th
time, I do not know and cannot remember. I do not want to be sick
again. 1 do not want to be sick.
This lithic grin ... ?
Not aD. the lioB.S he'd walked betweealast night with Tak.
Vaguely he thought he'd been wandering toward the river. But SOmehow chance, or bodily memory; had returned him to the park.
Inside the entrance was ashy grass; dimmed trees forested the crest.
He turned his forefinger in his nostril., put it in his mouth for the
salt, ,then laughed and pressed his palm on the stone jaw; moved his
hand. Stain passed between his fingelS. The sky-hed laughed, flung
up his head-did not look infinitely far; a soft ceiling, rather, at some
deceptive twenty, a hundred twenty feet. Oh, yes, laughter was good.
His eyes filled with the blurry sky and tealS; he moved his hand on the
pitted jaw. When he took his palm from the dense braille, he was
breathing hard.
No gushing breeze over this grass. His breath was thin, hoalSe, suggestiveof phlegm and obstacles and veins. Still, he'd laughed.
The sculptor had dug holes for eyes too deep to spot bottom.
. He dug his finger in his nose again, sucked it, gaawed it; a gusty
chuckle, aB.d he turned through the leonine gate. It's easy, he thought,
to put sounds with either white (maybe the pure tone of an audio generator; and the other, its opposite, that was called white noise), black
(large gOllgs,larger bells), or the primary cololS Cthe variety of the orchestra). Pale grey is silence.
The Ruins of Morning 61
A good wind could wake this city. As he wandered in" buildings
dropped behind him below the park wall. (He wondered what ill one
had put it to sleep.) The trees waited.
This park stretches on racks of silence.
In his mind were some dozen visions of the city. He jogged, jaggedly,
amoRg them. His body felt hip heavy. His tongue lay down like a worm
in his mouth. Breath in the cavity imitated wind; he listened to the air
in his nose since that was all there was to listen to.
In its cage, his fist wilted, loose as a heavy flower.
Mornings after sex usually gave him that l've-been-eating-the-Iotusagain, that Oh-all-soft-and-drifty, that hangover-inside-out where pain
is all in the world and the body tingly and good. Delayed? But here it
was. The commune? Debating whether to hunt them or avoid them,
he found the water fountain.
He spat blood-laced amber clots. Water tugged them from the pebbly
basin. The next were greenish and still gum bloody. He frothed the
water, bitter with what was under his tongue, through his teeth and
spat and spat till he spat clear. His lips tingled. Yeah, and felt better.
He left the fountain, gazing on grey, his belly cooler, blades whispering at his jeans. Across the damask of doubt and hesitation was unexpected joy like silver.
Something ... He'd survived.
He pranced on the hill, happily oblivious to heart and bowels and
the rest of the obstreperous machinery. This soft, this ecstatic grey, he
swung through, in lop-looped chain, tasting the sweet smoke, buoyed
on dusty grass.
The long, metallic note bent, broke to another. Someone was playing the harmonica-silver? Artichokes? Curiosity curved through,
pressed down his mouth at both cornelS.
Like some color outside this grey range, music spilled the trees. He
slowed and walked wonderingly into them. His reet came down in
hushing puddles of grass. He frowned left and right and was very
happy. The notes knotted with the upper branches.
In a tree? No ... on a hill. He followed around the bouldelS that
became a rise. The music came down from it. He looked up among
leaf-grey and twig-grey. Picture: the harp leaving the lips, and the
breath (leaving the lips) become laughter. "Hello," she called, laughing.
"Hello,' he said and couldn't see her.
"Were you wandering around all night?"
He shrugged. "Sort of."
62 Dhalgren
"Me too."
While he realized he had no idea of her distance, she laughed again
and that turned back into music. She played oddly. but wel\. He
stepped off the path.
Waving his right hand (caged), grasping saplings with his left
(free), he staggered on the slope. "Hey ... !" because he slipped, and
she halted.
He caught up balance, and climbed.
She played again.
He stopped when the first leaves pulled from her.
She raised her apple eyes-apple green. Head down, she kept her
lips at the metal organ.
Roots, thick as her arms, held the ground around her. Her back was
against a heavy trunk. Leaves hid her all one side.
She wore her shirt. Her breasts were stin nice.
His throat tightened. He felt both bowels and heart now; and all the
little pains that defined his skin. Its stupid to be afraid ... of trees. Still,
he wished he had encountered her among stones. He took another
step, arms wide for the slant, and she was free of foliage-except for
one brown leaf leaning against her tennis shoe.
"Hi .. on
A blanket lay beside her. The cuffs of her jeans were frayed. This
shirt, he realized, didn't have buttons (silver eyelets on the cloth). But
now it was half laced. He looked at the place between the strands. Yes,
very nice.
"You didn't like the group last night?" She gestured with her chin
to some vague part of the park.
He shrugged. "Not if they're going to wake me up and put me to
work. 7t
"They wouldn't have, if you'd pretended to be asleep. They don't
really get too much done. "
"Shit." He laughed and stepped up. "I didn't think so."
She hung her arms over her knees. "But they're good people."
He looked at her cheek, her ear, her hair.
"Finding your way around Bellona is a little funny at first. And
theY've been here a while. Take them with a grain of salt, keep
eyes open, and they'll teach you a lot. "
"How long have you been with them?" thinking, I'm towering over
her, only she looks at me as though I'm too short to tower.
"Oh, my place is over here. I just drop in on them every rew days
The Ruins of Morning 63
... like Tak. But I've just been around a few weeks, though. Pretty busy
weeks." She looked through the leaves. When he sat down on the log,
she smiled. "You got in last night?"
He nodded. "Pretty busy night."
Something inside her face fought a grin.
"What's . .. your name?"
Colson. YOl1r name is Kidd1 isn1t it?11
"No, my name isn't Kidd! I don't know what my name is. I haven't
been able to remember my name since ... I don't know.' He frowned.
"Do you think that's crazy?"
She raised her eyebrows, brought her hands together (he remembered the remains of polish: so she must have redone them this
morning: her nails were green as her eyes) to turn the harmonica.
"The Kid is what Iron Wolf tried to name me. And the girl in the
commune tried to put on the other'd'. But it isn't my name. I don't remember my God-damn name."
The turning halted.
"That's like being crazy. I forget lots of other things. Too. What do
you think about that:" and didn't know how he would have interpreted his falling inflection either.
She said: "I don't really knOw."
He said, after the silent bridge: "Well, you have to think something!"
She reached into the coiled blanket and lifted out ... the notebook?
He recognized the charred cover.
Biling at her lip, she began ruilling pages. Suddenly she stopped,
handed it to him-" Are any of these names yours?"
The list, neatly printed in ballpOint, filled two columns:
Geoff Rivers
Kit Darkfeather
David Wise
Michael Roberts
]erryShank
Frank Yoshikami
Harold Redwing
Madeleine Terry
Priscilla Meyer
George Newman
Ann Harrison
ThomasSask
Arthur Pearson
Earlton Rudolph
Phillip Edwards
Virginia Colson
Hank Kaiser
Garry Disch
Alvin Fischer
Susan Morgan
William Dhalgren
Peter Weldon
Linda Evers
Preston Smith
64 Dhalgrll1l
"What is this shit?" he asked, distressed. "It says Kit, with that Indian last name."
that your name after aJHt)
"No. No, it's not my name. II
"You look like you could be part Indian.'
"My mother was a God-damn Indian. Not my father. It isn't my
name." He looked back at the paper. "Your name's on here. •
"No."
"Colson!tI
"My last name. But my first name's Lanya, not Virginia.'
"You got anybody in your family named Virginia?"
"I used to have a great aunt Vrrgilia. Really. She lived in Washington D.C. and I only met her once when I was seven or eight. Can you
remember the names of anybody else in your family? Your father's?"
{.INo."
"Your mother's?" .
" ... what they look like but. .. that's all.'
"Sistm or brothers?"
" .•. didn't have any."
After silence he shook his head.
She shrugged.
He closed the book and searched for speech: "Let's pretend-" and
wondered what was in the block of writing below the lists- "that we're
in a city, an abandoned city. It's burning, see. All the power's out. They
can't get television cameras and radios in here, right? So everybody
outside's forgotten about it. No word comes out. No word comes in.
We'll pretend it's all covered with smoke, okay? But now you can't even
see the fire."
"Just the smoke," she said. "Let's pretend-'
He blinked.
"-you and I are sitting in a grey park on a grey dayina grey city."
She frowned at the sky. "A perfectly ordinary city. The air pollution is
terrible here. n She smiled. "I like Il'ey days, days like this, days without shadows-" Then she saw he had jabbed his orchid against the log.
Pinioned to the bark, his fist shook among the blades.
She was on her knees beside rum: "111 tell you what let's do. Let's
take that off!" She tugged at the wrist snap. His arm shook in her fingers. "Here. n Then his hand was free.
He was breathing hard. "That's-' he looked at the weapon still
fixed by three points-"a pretty wicked thing. Leave it the fuck alone."
The Ruins of Morning 65
"\t's a tool," she said. "You may need it. Just know when to use it."
She was rubbing his hand.
His heart was slowing. He took another, very deep breath. "You
ought to be afraid of me, you know?"
She blinked. "I am." And sat back on her heels. "But I want to try
out some things I'm afraid of. That's the only reason to be here. What,"
she asked, "happll1led to you just then?"
"Huh?"
She put three fingers on his forehead, then showed him the glistening pads. "You're sweating. II
"I was ... very happy all of a sudden."
She frowned. "I thought you were scared to death!"
He cleared his throat, tried to smile. "It was like a ... well, suddenly
being very happy. I was happy when I walked into the park. And then
all of a sudden it just ... " He was rubbiBg her hand back.
"Okay." She laughed. "That sounds good.'
His jaw waS clamped. He let it loosen, and grunted: "Who ... what
kind of a person are you?"
Her face opened, with both surprise and chagrin: "Let's see. BrilliaBt, charming-eight-four pounds away from being stunningly
gorgeous ... I like to tell myself; famoHy's got all sorts of money and
social connections. But I'm rebelling against all that right now.'
"Okay."
Her face was squarish, small, not gorgeous at all, and it was nice too.
"That sounds accurate."
The humor left it and there was only surprise. "You believe me?
You're a doll!' She kissed him, suddenly, on the nose, didn't look embarrassed;exactly; rather as though she were timing some important
gesture.
Which was to pick up her harmonica and hail notes in his face.
They both laughed (he was astonished beneath the laughter and suspected it showed) while she said: "Let's walk."
"Your blanket ... l'
"Leave it here."
He carried the notebook They flailed through the leaves, jogging.
At the path he stopped and looked down at his hip. "Uh . .. ?"
. She looked over.
"Do you,' he asked slowly, "remember my picking up the orchid and
putting it on my belt here?"
"I put it OB there.» She thumbed some blemish on the harmonica.
66 Dhalgren
"You were going to leave it behind, so 1 stuck a blade through your belt
loop. Really. It can be dangerous around here.'
Mouth slighlly open, he nodded as, side by side, rhey gained rhe
shadowless paths.
He said: "You stuck it there.' Somewhere a breeze, without force,
made its easy way in the green. He was aware of the smoky odor about
them for two breaths before it faded with inatt<lntion. "All by yourself,
you just found those people in the park?"
She gave him a You-must-be-out-of your-mind look. "I came in wirh
quite a party. actually. Fun; but after a ,couple of days rhey were getting
in the way. I mean its nice to have a car. But if you're rendered helpless by lack of gasoline ... ' She shrugged. "Before we got here, Phil
and 1 were taking bets whether this place really existed or not." Her
sudden and surprising smile was all eyes and very little mourh. "I won.
I stayed with the group 1 came in wirh awhile. Then 1 cut them loose.
A few nights with Milly, Jobn, and the rest.'Then I've been olIhaving
adventures-until a few nights ago, when I came back."
Thinking: Oh-"You had some money when you got here?" - Phil.
"Group 1 came wirh did. A lot of good it did them. I mean how long
would you wander around a city like this looking for a hotel? No, 1 had
to let them go, They were happy to be rid of me.'
"They left?"
She looked at her sneaker and laughed, mock ominous.
"People leave here," he said. "The people who gave me rhe orchid,
they were leaving when 1 came."
"Some people leave.' She laughed again. It was a quiet and selfassured and intriguing and dislrurbing laugh.
He asked: "What kind of adventures did you have?"
"I watched some scorpion fights. that was weird. Nightmares trip
isn't my bag, but this place is so small you can't be that selective. I
spent a few days by myself in a lovely home in rhe Heights: which finally seDt me up the wall. I like living outdoors. Then there was
Calkins for a while.'
"The guy who publishes rhe newspaper?"
She nodded. "I spent a few days at his place. Rogers set up this permanent country weekend, only inside city limits. He keeps some interesting people around.'
"Were you one of the iateresting people?"
"I think Roger just considered me decorative, actually. To amuse rhe
interesting ones. His loss."
The Ruins of Morning 67
She was pretty in a sort of rough way-maybe closer to "cute.'
He nodded.
"The brush wirh civilization did me good, tkough. Then 1 wandered
out on my own again. Have you been to rhe monastery. out by Holland?"
IlHuh?D
"I've never been there either, but I've heard some very sincere people have set up a sort of religious retreat. I still can't figure out if they
got started before this whole thing happened, or whether they moved
in and took over afterward. But it still sounds impressive. At least what
one hears,"
"John and Mildred are pretty sincere."
"Touche!" She puffed a chord, then looked at him curiously.
laughed, and hit at the lrigh stems. He looked; and her eyes, waiting
for him to speak, were greener than the haze allowed any leaf around.
"ItS like a small town," he said. "Is there anything else to do but gos·
sip?"
"Not really." She lrit rhe stems again. "Which is a relief, if you look
at it lhat way."
"Where does Calkins live?"
"Oh, you like to gossip! 1 was scared for a moment." She stopped
knocking the stalks. "His newspaper olTice is awful! He took some of
us rhere, righuo where they print it. Grey and gloomy and dismaland
echoing." She screwed up her face and her shoulders and her hands.
"Ahhhh! But his house-" Everything unscrewed. "Just fine. Right
above rhe Heights. Lots of grounds. You can'see the whole city. 1 imagine it must have been quite a sight when all the street lights were on
at night." A small screwing, now. "I was trying to figure out whether
he\; always lived there, or if he just moved in and took it over too. But
you don't ask questions like rhat.·
He turned and she followed.
uWhere is his house?"
"I tlrink the actual address is on Brisbain Sourh.·
"How'd you get to meet him?"'
"They were having a party. I was wandering by. Someone 1 knew invited me in. Phil, actually."
"That sounds easy."
"Ah, it was very difficult. You want to go up there and meet
Calkins?"
"Well, everything looks pretty scroungy down around here. I could
wander up and See if somebody would invite me in." He paused. "Of
68 Dhalgren '
course, you're a girl. You'd have an easier time, wouldn't you? To be ...
decorative?"
She raised her eyebrows. "Not necessarily."
He glanced at her in time to catch her glancing back. The idea struck
him as amusing.
"You see that path behind the soccer posts?"
"Yeah."
"It exits right on to Brisbain North. Which turns into Brisbain South
after a whille. I>
"Hey!" He grinned at her, then let his head fall to the side. "What's
the matter?l'l
"I'm sad you're gOing. I was all set for a dangerous, exciting afternoon, wandering about with you, playing my harmonica for you. "
"Why don't you come?"
Her look held both embarrassment and collusion. "I've been."
Hammering sounded behind them.
To his frown, she explained: "OneofJohn:'; work projects. They've
gotten back from lunch. I know theres food left. The guy who does most
of their cooking,Jommy. is a friend of mine; do you want to eat?"
UNawo" He shook his head. "Besides, I haven't decided if I want-"
'Yes, you have. But I'll. see you when you get back. Take She
held out the notebook. "It'll give you something to read on the way."
For a moment he let his face acknowledge that she wanted him to
stay. "Thanks ... all right."
"Thats one nice thi'ng about this place," she answered the acknowledgement; "when you come back, I will see you.' She raised her
harmonica to her "You can't lose anybody here. n In the metal,
her eyes and nostrils Were immense darknesses, set in silvered flesh,
cut through, without lid or lash or limit, by green anei. green. She blew
a discord, and walked away.
As he left the eyeless lions, it occurred to him: You can't make that
discord on a harmOnica.
Not on any harmonica he'd ever had.
2
He'd walked three blocks when he saw, in the middle of the fourth, the
church.
Visible were two (of presumably four) clocks around the steeple.
Nearing, he Saw the hands were gone.
The Ruins of Morning 69
He scrubbed at his forehead with the back of his wrist. Grit rolled
between skin and skin. All this soot ...
The thought occurred; I'm in fine shape w get myself invited into a
house party!
Organ music came from the church door. He remembered Lanya had
said something about a monastery ... Wondering if curiosity showed
on his face, he stepped carefully-notebook firmly under his arminto the tiled foyer.
Through a second door, in an office, two of the four spools on the
aluminum face of an upright tape recorder revolved. There were no
lights on.
It only really registered as he turned away (and, once registered, he
had no idea what to do with the image): Thumb-tacked above the office
bulletin-board was the central poster from Loufer's wall: the black man
in cap, jacket, and boots.
Another door (leading to the chapel itself?) was ajar on darkness.
He stepped back to the sidewalk-
"Hey. there!"
The old man wore maroon bell bottoms, gold-rimmed spectacles;
underneath a dull corduroy jacket, a bright red tanktop: beard, beret.
He carried a bundle of newspapers under one arm. "How you doing on
this pearly afternoon?"
"Hello. II
"Now ... I bet you're wondering what time it is.' The old man
strained his ropy neck. "Let me see." He gazed at the steeple. "Let me
see. That would be about ... eleven ... twenty-five. n His head came
down in wheezy laughter. "How do you like that, hey? Pretty good
trick, huh? (You want a paper? Take one!) It is a trick. I'll show you
how to do it. What. the matter? Paper don't cost you. You want a subscription?"
"Under your beard ... where'd you get that thing aTound your
neck?"
"You mean ... " The old man:'; free hand moved to tho peppery hair
that went without break from the top of his chest to his chin. He unfastened the necklace, which fell, like a diamond snake. " ... this?
Where'd you get yours?"
He'd thought collar and cuff hid his Own. "On my way here. It says
it comes from Brazil."
The old man held the end of the chain close to see:
" ... Japan?'" then extended the end for him to look.
70 Dhalgren
On the tab of brass were stamped letters: ad. in Japan. Before ade
there was a squiggle undoubtably an m.
The old mall got it aroand his neck again and finally managed to secure it with one hand.
He looked down at the papers: he could read, just at the old man's
crumpled cuff:
BELLONA TIMES
Wednesday. April 1, 1979
NEW BOY IN TOWN!
He frowned at that.
"I didn't se. your chain," the man went on, in unrequested explanation. "But you wouldn't have asked if you hadn't got one yourself,
now, would you?"
He llodded, mail;tly to make the geezer continue-an urging not
needed.
"I guess it's like a prizefor an initiation. Only you did .. 't know you
wefe being initiated? And Ibat sort of upset you, 1 bet."
He nodded again.
"My name's Faust," the old man said. "Joaquim Faust."
"Wakeem ... r'
"You're pronouncing it right. From your accent, though, I bet you
wouldn't put the same letlers in it I do."
He reached for Joaquim's extended hand: Joaquim caught his up in
a biker shake. "You say-" Joaquim frowned before he let go- "you
got yours On your way here? Outside Bellona?"
"That's right."
Joaquim shook his head and said, "Mmmmmm," while a roaring that
had been gathering seconds now, broke over head. They looked up.
Nothing was visible in the haze. The jet lingered disturbingly long,
tben pulled away. The taped organ sounded soft after it.
"On die clock," Joaquim said. "The front face. That little stub used
to be the minute hand. So you can about figure out whicA way it's
pointing." .
"Oh. What about the hour?"
]oaquim shrugged. "I left the olIice around eleven. Least I guess it
was eleven. I haven't been gone that long."
"What happened to the. : . hands?"
"The niggers. The first night, I guess it was. When all that lightning
The Ruins of Morning 71
was going on. They went wild. Swarmed all over. Broke up a whole lot
of stuff around here-jackson'S just down there."
"Jackson?2t
"Jackson Avenue is where most of the niggers live. Used to live. You
ne.w?"
He nodded.
"See if you can get hold of the paper for that day. People say you
never seen pictures like that before. They was burning. And they had
ladders up, and breaking in the windows. This guy told me there was
a picture of them climbing up on the church. And breaking off the
clock hands. Tearing each other up, too. There's supposed to be one set
of pictures; of this big buck, getting after this little white girl ... a whole
lot of stink about them pictures. 'Rape' is the nasty word they didn't
use in the paper but rape is what it was. People was saying Calkins
shouldn't've printed them. But you know what he did?" Joaquim's
twisted face demanded answer.
"No. What?" he ceded, warily.
"He weRt down and hunted up the nigger in the pictures and had
somebody interview him; and he printed every thing. Now if you ask
me, what he shouldn't have printed was that interview. I mean,
Calkins is all interested in civil. rights and things. He really is. The colored people in this town had it bad I guess, and he was concerned
with that. Really concerned. But that nigger had the dirtiest
and didn't use it to talk nothing but dirt I do,,' t think he even knew
what a newspaper interview was. I mean, I know the colored people
got itrough. But if you want to help, you don't print a picture of the
biggest, blackest buck in the world messin' up some little blond-headed
seventeen-year-old girl, and then runnin' two pages of him saying how
good it was, with every other word 'shit' and 'fuck,' and 'Wooo-eeeee',
how he's going to get him some more soon as he can, and how easy
it's gonna be with no pigs around! I mean not if you want to helpdo you? And because of the article, Harrison-his name was George
Harrison-is some sort of hero, to all the niggers over inJackson;
and you'd think just about everybody else too. Which shows YOIl the
kind of people we got·
"But you didn't see it, though?"
Faust waved that away.
"There's this other colored man up from the South, some civil rights,
militant person-a Mr Paul Fenster? He got here right around the time
it happened. Calkins knows him too, I guess, and writes about what
72 Dhalgren
he:S doing a lot. Now I would guess this guy probably has some decent
intentions; but how:S he going to do anything with all that George Harrison business, hun? I mean its just as well-" he looked around-
"theres not too many niggers left in jackson. "
He resolved annoyance and curiosity with the polite question:
"What started it? The riot I mean."
joaquim bent his head far to the side. "Now you know, nobody has
the story really straight. Something fell.»
"Huh?'"
"Some people say a house COllapsed. Some others say a plane
crashed right there in the ntiddle of Jackson. Somebody else was talking about some kid who got on the roof of the Second City bank building and gunned somebody down."
"Somebody got killed?"
"Very. It was supposed to be a white kid on the roof and a nigger
that got shot. So th<iY started a riot."
"What did the paper say?"
"About everything I did. Nobody knows which one happened for
sure.n
"If a plane crashed, somebody would have known."
. "This was back at the beginning. Things were a hell of a lot more
confused then. A lot of buildings were burning. And the weather was
something else. People were still trying to get out. There were a hell
of a lot more people here. And they were scared."
"You were here then?"
Joaquim pressed his lips tiU mustache merged with beaRi. He shook
his head. "I just heard about the newspaper article. And the pictures."
"Where'd you come from?"
"AhhhhhJ" Faust waggled a free finger in mock reproval. "You have
to learn not to ask questions like that. Its not polite. I didn't ask nothing about you, did I? I told you my name, but I didn't ask yours.»
"I'm sorry.' He was taken back.
"You going to meet a lot of people Who'll get all kinds of upset if you
go asking them about before they came to Bellona. I might as well tell
you, so you don't get yourself in trouble. Especially-" Faust raised his
beard and put a thumb beneath his choker-"people wearing one of
these. Like us. I bet if I asked your name, or maybe your age, or why
you got an orchid on your belt ... anything like that, I could really get
your dander up. Now couldn't!?"
He felt the discomfort, vague as remembered pain, in his belly.
"I come from Chicago, most recently. Frisco before that.» Faust
The Ruins of Morning 73
reached down to hold out one leg of his belled pants. "A grandpa Yippie, yeah? I'm a traveling philosopher. Is that good enough for you?"
"I'm sorry I asked.»
"Think nothing of it. I heard Bellona was where it was at. It must
be, now. I'm here. Is that good enough?"
He nodded again, disconcerted.
"I got a good, honest job. Sold the Tribe on the corner of Market and
Van Ness. Here I'm Bellona's oldest newspaper boy. Is that enough?"
"Yeah. Look, I didn't mean-"
"Something about you, boy. I don't like it. Say-" Eyelids wrinkled
behind gold-rimmed lenses-"you're not colored, are you? I mean
you're pretty dark. Sort of full-featured. Now, I could say 'spade' like
you youngsters. But where I was comin' up, when I was comin' up, they
were niggers. They're still niggers to me and I don't mean nothing by
it. I want all the best for them."
"I'm American Indian," he decided, with resigned wrath.
"Oh." Joaquim tilted his head once more to appraise. "Well, if you're
not a nigger, you must be pretty much in sympathy with the niggers."
He came down heavy on the word for any discomfort value it still held.
"So amI. So amI. Only they wont ever believe it of me. I wouldn't either if I was them. Boy, I got to deliver my papers. Go on-take one.
That's right; there you go." Faust straightened the bundle. under his
arm. "You interested in rioting niggers-and just about everybody is--"
the aside was delivered with high theatricality-"you go look up those
early editions. Heres your paper, Reverend." He strode across the sidewalk and handed another paper to the black minister in pavementlength cassock who stood in the church door.
"Thank you,Joaquim." The voice was ... contralto? There was a
hint of ... bIeasts beneath the dark robe. The face was rounded, was
gentle enough for a woman.
The minister looked at him now, as joaqnim marched down the
street. "Faust and I have a little game we play," she-it was she-explained to his bemusement. "You musm't let it upset you." She smiled,
nodded, and started in.
"'Excuse me ... Reverend . .. n
She turned. 'Yes?"
"Eh ... " Intensely curious, he could focus his curiosity on no subject. 'What kind of church is this, here?" He settled on that, but felt it
hopelessly contrived. What he wanted to ask about, of course, was the
poster.
She smiled. "Interfaith, interracial. We've been managing to have
I
74 Dhalgren
services three times a week for a while now. We'd be very happy if you
were interested in coming. Sunday morning, of course. Then again,
Tuesday and Thursday evenings. We don't have a very large congregation, yet. But we're gathering our Bock."
"You're Reverend.' . . 1"
"Amy Taylor. I'm a lay preacher, actually. This is a project I've taken
on myself. Working out quite well, too, everything considered."
·You just sort of moved into the church and took it over?"
"Afler the people who were here abandoned it." She did not brush
her hands off. She extended one. It might have been the same gesture.
"I'm glad to meet you.'
He shook. "Glad (0 meet you."
"I hope you come to our services. This is a lime of stress for everybody. We need all the spiritual help we can get . .'. don't you think?"
Her grip (likeJoaquim's) lingered. And it was fumer. "Hey, do you
know what day it is?"
She looked down at the paper. "Wednesday."
"But ... How do you know when its Sunday."
She laughed. 1t was very self-assured laughter. "Sunday services
happen when the paper says Sunday. Mr Calkins confuses dates, I
know. But there's never more than One Sunday every seven days. Or
one Tuesday, either. NoW; Thursdays slip up. I went to See him about
that. A very polite man. And very concerned about what goes on in
bis city, despite what some people find a trying sense of humor. I had
noticed about the frequency of Sundays mysdf. He explained about
Tuesdays; but he held out for arbitrary Thursdays. He quite nicely of.
fered to declare a Thursday any time I asked-if I would give him
twenty-four-hour notice.' Her perfect seriousness ruptured with a
smile. And she dropped his hand. "The whole bUSiness is funny. I feel
as strange talking about it as you must hearing it, I'm sure." Her natural hair, her round, brown face: he liked her. ·Will you try and come
to our services?:tt
He smiled. "I'll try." He was even vagudy sorry to lie.
"Good."
"Reverend Taylor?"
Her sparse eyebrows rose as she looked back.
"Does this street go toward ... Mr Calkins'?"
"Yes, his home is about a mile up. You ha". to cross Jackson. Two
days ago some brave soul had a bus runmng back and forth along
Broadway. Only aBe bus. But then it doesn't have any traffic to fight. I
The Ruins of Morning 75
dOB't know if it's still going. But that would take you to the newspaper
office, anyway. Not his home. I suppose you could walk. I did."
"ThaBks." He left her, smiling after him from the doorway. No, he
decided. That probably wasn't the monastery. He pictured the tape
winding and winding as the music dimmed, chord after chord falling
from glimmering reels.
Jackson Avenue was a wide street, hut the crowded houses, blurred
with Boon-smoke, were mostly wood. Trolley wires webbing the intersection were down, in a snarl, on the corner pavement. Two blocks
off, wreckage fumed. Billows cleared charred beams, then rolled to.
A block in the other direction a heavy figure with a shopping bag
paused mid-trek between corner and corner to watch 'him watching.
Though it was an arbitrary Wednesday afternoon, the reel was of some
ominous Sunday morning.
3
there is no articulate resonance. The common problem, I suppose, is
to have more to say than vocabulary and syntax can bear. That is why
I am hunting in these desiccated streets. The smoke hides the sky's variety, stains consciousness, covers the holocaust with something safe
and insubstantial. It protects from greater flame. It indicates fire, but
obscures the souree. This is not a useful city. Very little here approaches
any eidolon of the beautiful.
This is what a good neighborhood in Bellona looks like?
The ground floor windows were brokeB in the white house there;
curtains hung out.
Tbe street was clean.
Bare foot and sandal, bare foot and sandal: he watched the pavement's grain slip beneath them.
A door beside him stood wide.
He kept walking. Easier to think that all these buildings are inhabited, than that their vacaBcy gives me license to loot where I will-not
1001. Borrow. Still, it's unnerving.
Loufer had said something about shotguns.
But be was hungry after all and he was going to-borrow food soon.
He broke a window with a stick he had found wedging back a garage
door (eight jars of instant coffee OB ,the kitchen shelO and sat at the
formica dinette table to eat a cold caB (can-opener in the drawer) of
Campbell's Pepperpot. (Easy!) Marveling between fingerfuls of undi-
76 Dhalgren
luted soup (salty!), he looked from the paper he'd laken from Faust, to
the notebook he'd gotten from umya. Made himself a cup of coHee with
hot water-after running ten seconds, it was Sleaming and spittingfrom the lap. Finally. he opened the notebook at random and read, in
the terribly neat ballpoint:
It is not that I have no future. Rather it continually fragments on the
insubstantial and indistinct ephemera of now. In the summer country, stitched with lightning, somehow there is no way to conclude . ..
He looked up at creakings. But it was only some slight architectural
shift. Nobody. he subvocali;:ed, lives here now. (The kitchen was very
clean.) Without particularly underslanding what he'd read (or not understanding it, for that matter) the notes by the absent journalist, coupled with the creak, made the back of his neck tingle.
Deja vu is a thing of the eye.
This was like reading lines that echoed some conversation he might
have followed idly once on a crowded street. The book hinted he pay
attention to part of his mind he could not even locate.
lability, not affectation; a true and common trait. But if I tried to
write down w hat I say as I mOVe from speech
He flipped more pages. There Was only writing on the right-hand
Ones. The left-hand ones were blank. He closed the book. He put the
coffee cup in the sink, the can in the empty garbage pail: when he
caught himself doing it, he laughed out loud, then tried silent justification: he could always stay here, make this place nicer than Tak's.
That made the back of his neck tingle again.
He closed the notebook and, with the paper tucked beside it,
climbed back out the window.
He scratched himself On broken glass, but only noticed it a block
away when be looked down to see a drop of blood had trickled across
the notebook cover, red-brown on the cha·r. He nudged at the new;
purple-red scab with the blunt of his thumb, which just made it itch.
So he forgot about it and hurried on up Brisbain. It was only ... a
scratch.
Distance? Or destination?
He had no idea what to expect of either. These lawns and facades
needed sunlight, or at least light rain, to be beautiful The corner trees
might be clear green. But mist blurred them n.ow.
The Ruins of Morning 77
Odd that the elements of pleasure were so many greys, so much
fear, so many silences. That house there, gaping through dreary drapes
with intimations of rugs still out in July-someone had lived there. A
Doctor sign hung beside the door of that one: he mulled on the ·drugs
closeted behind the Venetian blinds. Well, maybe on the way back ...
Charcoal,like the bodies of beetles, heaped below the glittering wall
on the far corner. The sharpness of incinerated upholstery cut the
street's gritty stink. Through a cellar window; broken, a grey eel of
smoke slithered the Sidewalk to vaporize in the gutter. Through another, inlact, flickerings ... The Singular burning among the dozens
of whole bUildings was the most uncanny thing he'd seen.
He crossed quickly to the next block.
The loose rhythm of the day carried him through the streets. Once
it occurred to him that he was tired. Later, he looked for the tiredness
and found it had dispersed, like the eel.
This had to be the Heights.
He trudged on up the sloping street, by a window full of brass, three
layers of glass doors in a foyer, the head of a white slatue behind a high
hedge-all the vulnerable, gloomy elegance bothered him. Break in for
another cup of coHee? He wondered why the images of shotguns behind the curtains were stronger here. But laughed at them, anyway.
He moved, and the movement was a rush of sound among his body's
cavities. He slapped the paper and bloody notebook on his thigh,
thinking of Lanya, of Milly. of John. From his ather hip the orchid
swung. Chained in points of view; he loped along, an uneasy vandal,
suffering for the pillage his mind wreaked among the fabulous facades.
He moved, a point of tension, by homes that would have been luxurious in sunlight.
He was not sure why he decided to explore off the avenue.
In. the center of the alley was an oak, set in a circle of cobbles, ringed
in. a decorative fence. His heart beat fast.
He passed it.
The backside of the trt1nk was ash. Instead of heavy greenery. the
rear leaves were shriveled black.
Eyes wide at the vision, he turned as he passed it, to back away.
Then he looked at the houses.
On both sides of him walls were sundered on smashed furniture,
beams, and piled masonry. The demarcation between lawn and street
vanished beneath junk. Twenty feet on, the cobbles were upturned. He
felt his face squinch against the destruction.
78 Dhalgren
Bulldozers?
Grenades?
He could not tmagine what had caused this. Pavingstones were
smashed, loose, or upside down in raw earth, so that he was not even
certain where the next street began. Frowning, he wandered in the debris, stepped over a pile .of books, vaguely seeking the source of a
smoke plume waving fifty reet away, then, suddeuly, not seeking it.
He picked up a clock. The crystal flaked out, tinkling. He dropped
it and picked up a ballpoint pen, wiped the ashes against his pants,
clicked point in and Out. Half under plasteT was a wooden chest,
slightly larger than an attacM case. With the toe of his sandal, he
nudged up the lid. White powder swirled above forks, spoons, and
knives bound in grey ribbon, then setded 10 the purple velvet. He let
the lid clack, and hurried to the Avenue.
He practically ran Drisbains next three blocks, past houses empty
and elegant. But no", he was aware of lawn poles askew, of shapeless
heaps between them, of windows, which, beyond pale curtains, were
light as the sky behind them.
He was still clicking the ballpOint pen. So he put it in his shirt pocket. Then, at the next corner, he took it out again and stood very still.
If a wind came now, he thought, and caused any sonnd On dreary
street, he would Cry out.
TheFe was no wind.
He sat down on the curb, opened to the notebooks first page.
to wournl the autumnal city
he read once more. Hastily he turned the page over to the clear side.
He looked down the four streets, looked at the corner houses. He
sucked a breath through closed teeth, cHcked the point Out and began
to write.
In the middle of the third line, without taking pen off paper, he
swept back to cross it all out. Then, carefully, he recopied two words
on the next line. The second was "I.' Very carefuHy now, word followed word. He crossed out two more lines, from which he salvaged
"you, n "spinner, II and "pave, U dropping them iDto a new sentence
that bore no denotative resemblance to the one from which they
came.
Between lines, while he punched his pen pOint, his eye strayed to
,the writing beside his:
The Ruins of Morning 79
It is our despair at the textural inadequacies of language that
drives US to heighten the structural ones toward
"Annn!" out loud. There was not a pretty word in the bunch.
Roughly he turned the notebook back around the paper to avoid distraction.
Holding the last two lines in his head, he looked about at the
buildings again. (Why not live dangerously?) He wrote the last lines
hurriedly, notating them before they dispersed.
He printed at the top: "Brisbain"
Lifting his pen from the "n," he wondered if the word had any other
meaning than the name of the Avenue. Hoping it did, he began to recopy, in as neat a hand as he could, what he had setded on. He altered
one word in the last two lines ("cannot" became "can't"), and closed
the book, punled at what he had done.
Then he stood.
Struck with dizziness, he staggered 01I the curb, He shook his head,
and finally managed to get the world under him at the right angle. The
backs of his legs were cramped: he'd been in a near-fetal squat practically half an hour.
The dizziness gone, the cramps stayed with him for two blocks.
As weH he felt choked up in his breathing. That put him in touch
with a dozen other little discomforts that he had ignored till now.
So that it was not for another block after that he noticed he wasn't
afraid.
The pulling in the back of his right shin, or the mental disqUiet? He
gave up pondering the preferable, looked at a street sign, and noticed
that Brisbain N had become Brisbain S.
Click-click, click-click, dick-click: reaming what he was doing, he
put the pen back in his shirt pocket. Along the street, beside him, was
a stone wall. The houses across from him, parched and lawned and
spacious and columned, all had broken windows.
The car-a blunt, maroon thing at least twenty years old-grumbled up behind.
He'd jumped, in surprise, turning.
It passed, leaving no impression of the driver. But two blocks ahead,
it turned in at a gate.
Willow fronds draped the brick above him. Walking again, he ran
two fingers along the mortared troughs.
The gate was verdigrised brass, spiked at the top, and locked. Ten
80 Dhalgren
yards beyond the bars, the road got twisted up In the shaggiest pines
he'd ever seen. The brass plate, streaked pink with recent polish, said:
ROGER CALKINS
He looked through at the pines. He looked back at the other houses. Finally he just walked on.
The street ended in brush. He followed the wall around its carner
into bushes. Twigs kept jabbing beneath his sandal straps. His bare foot
went easier.
In the clearing, someOne had piled two crates, one on another,
against the brick: children after fruit Or mischief?
As he climbed (notebook and paper left on the ground) two women
behind the walls laughed.
Hepaused.
Their laughter neared, became mumed converse. A man guffawed
sharply; the double soprano recommenced and floated off.
He could just grasp ,the edge. He pulled himself up, elbows winging.
It was a lot harder than movies would make it. He scraped at the brick
with his toes. Brick rasped back at knees and chin.
His eyes cleared the top.
The waH was covered with pine needles, twigs, and a surprising
shale of glass. Through spinning gnats he saw the blunt pine tops arid
the rounded, looser heads of elms. Was that grey thing the cupola of a
house?
'Oh, I don't believe itJ." an invisible woman cried and laughed again.
His fingers stung; his arms were trembling.
"What the fuck do you think you're dOing, kid?" somebody behind
him drawled.
Shaking, he lowered, belt buckle catching a mortise once to dig his
stomach; his toes hit at the thin ledges; then the crate: he danced around.
And went back against the waH, squinting.
Newt, spider, and same monstrous insect, huge and out of focus,
glared with flashbulb eyes.
He got out an interrogative "Wh ... » but could choose no derming
final consonant.
"Now you know-" the spider in the middle extinguished: the tall
redhead dropped One freckled hand from the chains looping neck to
belly-"damn well you ain't supposed to be up there. n His face was
flat, his nose wide as a pug's, his lips overted, his eyes like brown
eggshells set with tarnished gold coins. His other hand, freckles blurred
in pale hair, held a foot of pipe.
wasn' t climbing in. II
The Ruins of Morning 81
"Shit," came out of the newt on the left in a black accent much heavier than the redhead's.
"Sure you weren't," the redhead said. His skin, deep tan, was galaxied with freckles. Hair and beard were curly as a handful of pennies.
·Yeah, sure. I just bet you weren't." He swung the pipe, snapping his
arm at the arcs end: neck chains rattled. "You better get down from
there, boy."
He. vaulted, landed one hand still on the crates.
The redhead swung again: The flanking apparitions came closer,
swaying. "Yeah, you better jump! n
• All right, I'm down. Okay-?"
The scorpion laughed, swung, stepped.
The chained boot mashed the corner of the notebook into the
mulch. The other tore the newspaper's corner.
come on-!"
He pictured himselflunging forward. But stayed still ... till he saw
that the pipe, next swing, was going 10 catch him on the hip-was
lunging forward.
"Watch it! He's got his orchid on ... ! n
He slashed with his bladed hand; the scorpion dodged back; newt
. and beetle spun. He had no idea where they were under their aspects.
He jammed his fist at the scaly simulation-his fist went through and
connected jaw-staggeringly hard with something. He slashed with his
blades at the retreating beetle. The spider rushed him. He staggered in
rattling lights. A hand caught him against the cheek. Blinking, he saw
a second, sudden black face go out under newt scales. Then, something
struck his head.
"Hey, he cut you, Spill, man!" That was the heavy black accent, very
far away. "Oh, hey, wow, Spitt! He really cut you. Spitt, you all right?"
He wasn't all right. He was falling down a black hole.
"The motherfucker! I'm going to get him for that-"
He hit bottom.
Pawing across that leafy bottom, he finally found the remnants of a
thought: His orchid had been hanging from his waist. No time had he
reached down toU Are ... you all right?"
-slip his roughened fingers into the harness, fasten the collar about
his knobby wrist ...
Someone shook him by the shoulder. His hand gouged moist leaves.
l'he other was suspended. He opened his eyes.
Evening struck the side of his head so hard he was nauseated.
82 Dhalgren
"Young man, are you all right?"
He opened his eyes again. The throbbing twilight concentrated on
one quarter of his head. He pushed himself up.
The man, in blue serge, sat back on his heels. "Mr Fenster, I think
he's conscious!"
A little ways away, a black man in a sports shirt stood at the clearings edge.
"Don't you think We should take him inside? Look at his head."
"No, I don't think we should. n The black put his hands in the pockets of his slacks.
He shook his head-only once, because it hurt that much.
"Were you attacked, young man?"
He said, "Yes," very thickly. A nod would have made it cynical, but
he didn't dare. .
The white collar between the serge lapels was knotted with an extraordinarily thin tie, White temples, below grey hair: the man had an
accent that was disturbingly near British. He picked up the notebook.
(The newspaper slid 01I onto the leaves.) "Is this yours?"
Anotherthick, "Yes.'
"Are you a student? Ies terrible, people attacking people right out
in the open like fhis. Terrible!"
"I think we'd better get inside," the black man said. "They'll be waiting for us."
"Just a minute!" came out with surprising authority. The gentleman
helped him to a sitting position. "Mr Fensler, I reaUy think we should
take this poor young man inside. Mr Calkins can't possibly object. This
is something of an exceptional circumstance."
Fenster took dark brown hands from his pockets and came over. "I'm
afraid it isn't exceptional: We've checked, now come on back inside .•
With surprising strength Fenster tugged hiin to his feet. His right
temple exploded three times en route. He grabbed ,the side of his head.
There was crisp blood in his hair; and wet blood in his sideburn.
"Can you stand up?" Fenster asked.
·Yes." The word was dough in his mouth. "Eh ... thanks for my-"
he almost shook his head again, but remembered-"my notebook."
The man in the tie looked Sincerely perpleKed. With a very white
hand, he tOuched his shoulder. ·You're sure you're a}1 right?"
'Yes,' automatically. Then, 'Could I get some water?"
"Certainly," and then to Fenster: ·We can cerlainly take him inside
for a glass of waler.·
The Ruins of Morning 83
"No--" Fenster spoke with impatient resignation-"we canlt take
him inside for a glass of water.' It ended with set jaw; small muscles
there defined in the dark skin. "Roger is very strict. You'll just have to
put up with it. Please, lets go back in."
The white man-fifty-five? sixly?-finally took a breath. "I'm ... "
Then he just turned away.
Fenster-forty? forty-five?-said, "This isn't a good neighborhood
to be in, young fellow. I'd get back downtown as fast as I could. Sorry
about all this."
"That's all right,' he got out. "I'm okay."
"I really am sorry." Fenster hurried after the older gentleman.
He watched them reach the corner, turn. He raised his caged hand,
looked at it between the blades. Was that why they had ... ? He looked
back toward the street.
His head gave a gratuitous throb.
Mumbling profanity, he put the paper on top of the notebook and
walked out.
They'd apparently gone back through the gate. And locked it. Motherfuckers, he thought. The gloom was denser now. He began to wonder
how long he'd been away from the park. Four or five hours? His head
hurt a lot. And it was getting dark.
Also it looked like rain ... But the air was dry and neutral.
Brisbain South had just become Brisbain North when he saw; a block
away, three people run from one side of the avenue to the other.
They were too far to see if they wore chains around their necks. Still,
he was overcome with gooseflesh. He stopped with his hand on the
side of a lamppost. (The globe was an inverted crown of ragged glass
points, about the smaller, ragged collar of the bulb.) He felt his shoulders pull involuntarily together. He looked at the darkening sky. And
the terror of the vandal-wrecked city assailed him: his heart pounded.
His armpits grew slippery.
Breathing hard, he sat with his back to the posts base.
He took the pen from his pocket and began to click the point. (He
hadn't put the orchid on ... ?) After a moment, he stopped to take the
weapon Crom his wrist and put it through his belt loop again: moving
armed through the streets might be provocative ... ?
He looked around again, opened his notebook, turned quickly past
"Brisbain" to a clean page, halfway or more through.
"Charcoal,' he wrote down, in small letters, "like the bodies ofbumt
beetles, heaped below the glittering black wall of the house on the far
Sf Dhalgren
corner." He hit at his lip, and wrote on: "The wet sharpness of incinerated upholstery cut the general gritty stink of the street. From the
rayed hole in ,the cellar window a grey eel of smoke wound across the
Sidewalk, dispersed before" at which point he crossed out the last two
words and substituted, "vaporized at the gutter. Through another window,' and crossed out window, "still intact, something flickered. This
Single burning building in the midst of dozens of other whole buildings was,· stopped and began 10 write all over again:
"Charcoal, like the bodies of beetles, heaped below the glittering
wall. The sharpness of inCinerated upholstery CUt the streets gritty
stink." Then he went back and crossed out "the bodies of" and went
on: "From a broken cellar window, a grey eel wound the sidewalk to
vaporize at the gutter. Through another, jnlact, something flickered.
This burning building,· crossed that out to substitute, "The singular
burning in the midst of dozens of whole buildings," and without
breaking Ihe motion of his hand suddenly tore the whole page from
the notebook. .
Pen and crumpled paper in his hand; he was breathing hard. After
a moment, he straightened out the paper and, on a fresh page, began
to copy again:
"Charcoal,like beetles heaped under the glittering wall ... "
When he finished the next revision, he folded the torn paper in four
and put it back in the notebook. On the back the former owner had
written:
first off. It doesn't rejlect my daily life. Most of what happens hour
by hour is quiet and still. We sit most of the time
Once more he made a face and closed the cover.
The mist had turned evening-blue. He got up and started aloug the
street.
Several blocks later he identified Ihe strange feeling: though it was
definitely becoming night, the air had not even Slightly cooled. Frail
smoke lay about him like a neutralizing blanket. .
Ahead, he could see the taller bUildings. Smoke had gnawed away
the upper stories. Stealthily, he 'descended inlo the injured city.
It does not offer me any protection, this mist; rather a refracting grid
through which to view the violent machine, explore the ,technocracy
of the eye itself, spelunk the semi-circular canal. I am traveling my own
optic nerve. Limping in a city without source, searching a day without
The Ruins of Morning 85
shadow, am I deluded with the inconstant emblem? I don't like pain.
With such disorientation there is no way to measure the angle between
such nearly parallel lines of Sight, when focusing on something at such
distance.
4
"There you are!" She ran out between the lions, crossed the street.
He turned, surprised, at the lamppost.
She se,ized his hand in both of hers. "1 didn't think I would see you
again before-Hey! What happened?" Her face twisted in the shadow.
She lost all her breath.
"I got beat up."
Her grip dropped; she raised her fingers, brushed his face.
"'Owww ... "
"You better came with me. What in the world did you do?"
"Nothing!' vented some of his indignation.
She took his hand again to tug him along. "You did something. PeopIe just don't get beat up for nothing at all."
om. this city-" he let her lead-"they do.·
"Down this way. No. Not even in this city. What happened? You've
got to get that washed off. Did you get to Calkins'?"
"Yeah." He walked beside her; her hand around his was almost
painfully tight-then, as though she realized it, the grip loosened. "I
was looking over the wall whell these scorpions got at me."
"Ohhh!' That seemed to explain it to her.
KlIOh' what?'"
"Roger doesn't like snoopers."
'So he sets scorpions to patrol the battlements?"
"I wouldn't be surprised. Sometimes he asks them for protection.·
"Hey!' He pulled loose; she swung around. In shadow, her eyes,
turned up, were empty as the lions'. He tried to fix his tongue at
protest, but she merely stepped to his side. They walked again, together, not touching, through the dark.
"In here."
"In where?"
"Here!" She turned him with a hand On his arm.
And opened a door he hadn't realized was beside them. Someone in
flickering silhouette said, "Oh; it's you. What's the matter?"
"Look at him; Lanya said. "Scorpions."
r
86 Dhalgren
"Oh." Leather jacket cap d I th closed the door. "Take him .' . 'd an B e':ro pants: long fingers pulled
"Thanks, Teddy." Insl e. ut n t make a big thing, huh?"
There were voices from the end of th hall
nail-thin Teddys attire E e· The flakes of light on He followed her. . came rom candles in iron candelabras.
At the endofthebaraw 'h I
of the men arou o.mans ow shattered to laughter. Three
four-fifths away like bright, black petals:
woman had faHen into t SCattered jackets. The
sweater. The candlelight put henna in man In a puffy purple
Another woman hId' Ir and blacked her eyes.
, a mg on to a drink with both h ds' mans greens and constructi b . an, In workthem, recognized Lanya and unsteadily between
been all week? Oh, you don't know honey, now have you
gone down. The boys are about t ow the class of thIS place has
steadily, off.. a run me ragged," and went, unLanya led him through the Ie th h
the" bar pushed th:m against on: of people toward
Hey, babes_ Lanya leaned h f' ". minuter on er lSts- can we sit here a
"Lanya-? Sure" Tak . d h .
th hell ha ' sal ,t en recogmzed him. "'esus KI'dl Wha e . ppenedtoy 7"H h J , • t down!" au. e pus ed over in the seat. "Come on. Sit
"Yeah ... " He sat.
;anya ':"" off between people:
Tak, Kldd-Ill be right back!"
He put the notebook and the hands through the shadows th paPdelr on the wooden table, drew his d h e can es dropped from th . b rew . is bare foot through sawdust. e Iron we s,
Tak, from lOoking after Lan t· db" visor still masked h' ,ya, urne ack. You got beat up?" The IS Upper .ace.
He nodded at Taks eyeless question
Taks lips pressed ben th h . . "Scorpions?" ea t e VISors shadow. He shook his head.
"Yeah,1!
;:he man across the table had his hands in his 1
What d they get from you?" Tak asked ap. "Nothing." .
"What did they think they were going to get?"
The Ruins of Morning 87
"r don't know. Shit. They just wanted to beat up on somebody, \
.
Tak shook his head. "No. That doesn't sound right. Not scorpIOns.
Everybody's too busy trying to survive around here just to go beating
up on people for fun." "r was up at the Calkins place, trying to look over the wall. Lanya
said he keeps the bastards patrolling the damn walls."
"Now there." Loufer shook a finger across the table. "Thats like \ was
telling you, Jack. Its a strange place, maybe stranger than any you've
ever been. But it still has its rules. You just have to find them out."
"Shit," he repeated, indignant at everybodys questioning of the incident. "They beat hen out of me."
"Looks like they did." Tak turned aCross the table. "Jack, want you
to meet the Kid, here. Jack just pulled into town this afternoon. The
Kid got in yesterday."
jack pushed hintself forward and reached out to shake.
"Hi.' He shook Jack's small, sunburned hand.
"Jack here is a deserter from the army."
At which Jack glanced at Tak with dismay, then covered it with an
embarrassed smile. "Ah ... hello," he said with a voice out of Arkansas.
His short-sleeve sportshirt was very pressed. Atmy shorn, his skull
showed to the temple. "Yeah, I'm a God-damn deserter, like he says.'
"That's nice," then realized how flip that sounded and was embarrassed.
"Tak here has been trying to tell me about how to get along in this
place," Jack offered: He had either not taken offense, or just not heard.
"Taks a lot smarter than I am, you knOw. It's pretty funny here, huh?"
He nodded.
"I was gonna go to Canada. But somebody told me about Bellona.
Said it was a pretty swinging place, you know? So I thought I'd stop
off here. On the way." Now he looked around the bar. The woman
howled again: The purple angora had abandoned her. The howl moved
predictably once more toward laughter and she sat, alone, shaking her
dark red hair over her drink. "\ ain't ever seen a place quite like this.
Have you?" Jack offered the conversation back to him.
"Oh, I bet you ain't," Tak intercepted. "Now the Kid he<e, you
know, he's my age? You probably would have thought he was younger
.than you are. Jack here is twenty. Now seriously, how old would you
say the Kid here is?"
"Uh . .. oh, I don't know," Jack said, and looked confused.
I I
88 DhaZgren
(He wanted to look at the engineer's shadowed face again, but not
yet.)
"Where the hell did you run alI to this morning, anyway?"
A dog barked, somewhere in the bar.
About to turn and answer Tak, he looked toward the noise. Claws
scrabbled; then, bursting between the legs of the people next to them,
the black muzzle and shoulders!
He snatched his arm up from the barking.
At the same time, Lanya arrived: "Hey, come on, girll"
Others had turned to watch the beast bark up at their table.
"Come on. Quiet down. " Lanya's hand strayed on the shaking head,
played on the black snout. "Be quiet! Quiet, now." The dog tried to
pun its head away. She grabbed its lower jaw and shook tt gently.
"What you making so much noise about? Shhhhh, you hear me?
Shhbb.!" The dog turned its brown eyes from the table, to Lanya, back
to the table. Bright priCks from the candies slid an the black pupils. It
licked her hand. "There now. Be quiet.· In the other was a wad of wet
paper towels. She sat down, put them on the table: they trickled on
the wood.
Jack's hands were back in his lap.
Tak pushed up his cap; the shadow uncovered his large, blue eyes.
He shook his head, and sucked his teeth in general disapproval.
'Come on, now," Lanya said once more to the dog.
It waited beside the table, panting.
He reached out toward the dark head. The panting stopped. He
passed his fingers over the rough hair, the wiry brows. The dog turned
to lick the ham of his thumb. "Yeah," he said. "You just be quiet."
"Is Muriel bothering you people?" Purple Angora sucked a sighing
breath. "' tell her-" he gestured toward the woman at the bar-"she
shouldn't bring her in here. Muriel is just not that we» trained. She gets
so excited. But she will bring her in here every night. I hope she hasn't
annoyed you."
Lanya reached again to rough the dog's head. "She's an old dear! She
didn't bother anybody."
"Well, thank you." Purple Angora bent to drag Muriel back to the
bar by the collar. Once he glanced back, frowned at them-
·See if you Can wipe some of that stulIolf your face," Lanya said,
wrinkling hers.
"Huh? Oh, yeah." He picked up a towel and held it to his temple;
which stung. Water rolled down.
The Ruins of Morning 89
He rubbed the blood off his cheek. Picked up another towel (the
firSt now purple to the rim) and wiped his face again.
"Hey," Jack said. "I think you're ... " with a vague gesture.
"Lord-!· Lmya said. "I'll get some more towels."
"Huh? Am I bleeding again?"
Tak took him by the ,chin and turned his face. "You sure are," and
pressed another towel against his head.
"Hey!" He reached across for Lanya's arm. "Look, let me just go to
the men's room. I'll fix it up."
She sat again. ""Are you sure . .. ? flo
"Yeah. I'll be back in a little while,' With one hand he held the paper
to his face; with the other, he picked up the notebook. ("What hap.
pened to him?" Tak was asking Lmya. And Lanya was leaning forward
to answer.) He pushed through the people next to them toward where
the mens room ought to be.
Behind him, music began, Staticy as an old radio, more like some·
body's wind-up victrola. He turned in front of the rest room door.
Neon lights had come on in a cage hung up behind the bar, (The
redhead's face [forty-five? fiftY?l was soap yellow in the glare:
("Muriel! Now, Muriel, be quietl"
(The fugitive barking stiUed, and the Purple Sweater sat up once
more.) Through the black curtain stepped a boy in a silver Gstring. He began to dance in the cage, shaking his hips, flicking his
hands, kicking. His ash-pale hair was flecked with glitter; glitter had
fallen down his wet brow. He grinned hugely, open mouthed, lips
shaking with the dance, at customers up and down the bar. His eyebrows were pasted over with silver.
The music, he realized through the static, was a mediey of Dylan
played by something like the Melachrino Strings. The "boy' was anywhere between fifteen and an emaciated thirty-five. Around his neck
hung glittering strands of mirrors, prisms, lenses.
He pushed into the bathroom as a big man in an army jacket came
out fingering his fly.
He locked the door, put his notebook on the cracked porcelain tank
(he'd left the paper on the table). looked at the mirror and said,
"Christ . .. !'
Tap turned full, the oold water only trickled over the tear-shaped stain.
He pulled paper towels, rasping, from their oontainer, and let them soak.
Minutes later the sink was awash with blood; the battleship linoleum
. was speckled with it; but his face was clear of gore and leakage.
90 Dhalgren
Sitting on the toilet, pants around his shins, shirt open, he turned
up a quarter-sized mirror on his belly and gazed down at a fragment
of his face with an eye in it. Water beaded his eyelashes.
He blinked.
His eye opened to see the drop, pink with dilute blood, strike the
glass and sp .. ad to the gripping callous.
He let go, took the notebook from the toilet tank, turned it back on
his thighs, and took out his pen. The coil pressed his skin:
"Murielle"
He doubted the spelling, but wrote On:
"Seen through blood, her clear eyes ... " He crossed out "clear" methodically, till it was a navy bar. He frowned, re-read, rewrote "clear,"
and wrote on. He stopped long enough to urinate and re-read again.
He shook his head, leaned forward. His penis swung against cold
porcelain. So he wiggled back On the seat; rewrote the whole line.
Once he looked up: A candle by the painted-over window was guttering.
"Remembering," he wrote, "by candle what I'd seen ,by moon ... "
frowned, aDd substituted a completely different thought.
"Hey!" Pounding at the door made him look up. "You aU right in
there, Kidd?"
"Tak?"'
·You need some help in ,there? Lanya seDt me to see if you'd fallen
in. You all right?"
"I'm okay. I'll be out in a minute."
"Oh. Okay. All right.'
He looked back at the page. Suddenly he scribbled across the bottom: "They won't let me finish this stopped, laughed,
closed the book, and put the pen back in his pocket.
He leaned forward on his knees aDd relaxed: the length and splash
surprised him. There wasn't any toilet paper.
So he used a wet toweL
Ught glittered on the dancers hips, his shaking hair, his sweating face.
But people had resumed their conversations.
He pushed through, glancing at the cage.
"Well, you certainly look a lot better," Lanya said.
The Ruins of Morning 91
Jack said: "Hey, , got you and your girlfriend a beer. One for you
too, see, because' didn't want you to think ... well, you know."
IIOh, n he said. "Sure. Thanks. D
"' mean Yak ain't let me buy anything all evening. So I thought I'd
get you and your girlfriend a beer.'
He nodded aDd sat. "Thanks."
"Yeah, thanks," Lanya said.
"She's a very nice girl.'
Lanya gave him a small Well-what-can-you-do look across the table
and drank.
The music growled to a stop in the middle of a phrase; people applauded.
Jack nodded toward the cage, where the daBcer panted. "r swear, I
never been in a place like this. It's really too much, you know? You got
a lot of places like this in Bellona?"
"Teddys here is the one and only," Tak said. "No other place like it
in the Western World. It used to be a straight bar back before. Improvement's not to be believed."
"It sure is pretty unbelievable," Jack repeated. "I've just never seen
anything like it."
Lanya took another swallow from her bottle. "You're not going to
die after am" She smiled.
He saluted her with his and emptied it by a third. "Guess not."
Tak suddenly twisted in his seat. "Ain't this a bitch! Hot as it is in
this God-damn place." He shrugged out of his jacket, hung it over the
bench back, then leaned one tattooed forearm on the table. "Now thatl;
a little more comfortable." He furrowed the meadow of his chest, and
looked down. "Sweating like a pig." He slid forward, stomach ridged
by the plank, and folded his arms. 'Yeah, that's a little better." He still
wore his cap.
"Jesus,' Jack said, looking around. "They let you do that in here?"
let me take my pants down and dance on the fucking table,"
Tak said, "if! wanted. Wouldn't they, LaBya-babes? You tell 'em."
"Tak,' Lanya said, "I'd like to see that. I really would." She laughed.
Jack said: "Wow!"
The dancer was climbing from the cage down to the bar; he made a
joke with somebody below; somebody else gave him a hand, and he
leapt lightly away.
At the doorway, a group had just corne in,
A couple of men in leather had gone up to a tall black in a khaki /
92 Dhalgren
shirt: even by candlelight, sweat darkened his shirt flanks. Other black
men arollnd wore suilS and lies. People were putting tables together.
The redhead's laughter carried her across the bar. She took the
black's beamcbroad, khaki shoulders. He embraced her; she struggled,
still laughing. Muriel barked about their knees.
Sepulchral Teddy. like some leather-sheathed plant, set bottles down,
held back chairs. The tall black fell into his seat; his fislS cracked open
like stone on rhe table. Others sat around him. He rened back,
stretched his arms, and caught the woman in coveralls with one and
the sparkling dancer with the other. Everyone laughed. The woman
tried not to spin her drink and pushed at the rough, dark head. The
dancer squealed: "Ooooo!" His G-string broke. He pulled the cord
across his white hip, yanked the whole pouch away, and spun from the
circling arm. A black hand smacked the chalky buttocks. The dancer
dodged forward, threw back an evil look that ended with a wink,
flipped the silver strap over his shoulder, and stalked off, cheek grinding cheek. .
"Jesus!" Jack said from the other side of the table.
The rabbity tuft above the dancer's bobbing genitals had been dusted with glitter.
Teddy moved about the joined tables, pouring. Other people were
coming up to ,talk, leaving to drink.
Lanya explained to his puzzled look: "That's George Harrison. Do
you ... ?"
He nodded. "Oh."
"Jesus!" Jack repeated. "You got all sorts of people in a place like
this, you know? I mean all kinds. Now that wouldn't happen where I
come from. 1t's-" he looked around-"pretty nice, huh?" He drank
more beer. "Everybody's so friendly."
Tak put his boot up on the bench and hung his arm across his knee.
"Until they start to tear the place apart." He tmned up his bottle to
waterfall at the wide mouth. "Hey, yOll all wanHO come up to my place?
Yeah, why don't you all come on back with me?" He put the beer down.
"Jack, lanya, you too, Kid."
He looked ,,-cross at her to see if she wanted to go.
But she was drinking beer again.
"Yeah, come on." Tak pointed at her, so that when her bottle came
down f<om her mouth, she looked at the engineer and frowned. "You're
not going to sit nound this place alI night and fight off the Horse
Women of Dry-gulch Canyon, are you?"
The Ruins of Morning 93
Lanya laughed. "Well, if you really want me, all right."
Tak slapped the table. "Good." Then he leaned over and stagewhispered, "You know she's a real stuckup bitch. Back when she used
to hang 011t here, she wouldn't be caught dead with the likes of me.
But after we got to know each other, she turned out not to be so bad."
He grinned across the table.
"Tak, I'm not stuck up. I always spoke to you!"
"Yeah, yeah, so's your old man!" Tak pointed with a thumb. "'5 he
your old man now?" Then he laughed. "Come on. Late supper at Tak
Loufer's. Tak Loufer's gonna give a party. Jack, you were saying how
hungry you were.'
"Gee," Jack said. "I don't know if ... "
Lanya soddenly turned to him. "Oh, Come on! Now, you have to
come with us. You've just gotten here. Tak wants to show you around."
She positively beamed.
·Well ... " Jack grinned at the table, at Tak, at the candelabra.
"I'll give you something to eat," Tak said.
"Hell, I'm not that-"
"Oh, come on!" Lanya insisted.
(He moved his hands over the notebook, stained with blood and
charcoal, to where the newspaper stuck out from the sides ... ) Lanya
reached across and laid one fingertip on his gnawed thumb. He looked
up. Tak was standing to leave. Jack: "Well, all right," finishing up his
beer; Tak pulled his coat from the bench back. Lanya rOse.
He picked up the paper and the notebook and stood beside her. Jack
and Tak (he remembered again the juxtaposition of sounds) went
anead. She pressed his arm and whispered, "I'd say I just earned my
supperl wouldn't you? 11
They skirted the Harrison party. "Hey, look a-dere go' 01' I'n Wo'f!"
Harrison grinned up from a hand of cards.
"Go drown yoms.If, ape," Tak Jibed back, "or I'll tell everybody
you're holding-"
Harrison pulled his cards away and rumbled into laughter-when
suddenly the silver-haired dancer bounced into their midst, G-string
mended; he grabbed Lanya's arm. "Darling, how do you always manage to leave here with all the beautiful men? Come on, everyone! A big
smile for your mother ... Fabulous! Can I come too?"
Tak swung his jacket, and the silver head ducked. "Get outa here.'
"Oh, now, with that big old hairy chest of hers, she thinks shel;just
too toO!11
94 Dhalgren
But they pushed toward the door.
The red-headed woman and Purple Angora were talking quietly by
the wall. Muriel, panting, lay between their feet. The flickering candles kept gouging lines in the woman's yellow face. She was not that
made up, he realized as they passed, nor that old. But the roughness of
her skin under the unsteady light suggested misplaced artifice. Over
her jacket (he had not seen it before and wondered how he had missed
it; unless simple profusion had misled him to think it was something
else) were loops and loops and loops of the strange chain Faust, Nightmare, the dancer, indeed, he himself, as well, wore.
Muriel barked.
He pushed into the hall, behind unya, in front of Jack.
Teddy smiled at them, like a mechanical skuH beneath his cap, and
held the door.
The very blonde girl at the sidewalk\; edge bit at her knuckle and
watched them intently.
The cool was surprising.
He had reached down to make sure that the orchid still hung in his
belt loop when she said: "Excuse me, I'm terribly sorry to bother you,
but was--" her face held its expression unsteadily- "George Harrison
... in there?" then lost it completely. Her grey eyes were very bright.
"Huh? Oh, yeah. He:' inside."
Her fist flew back against her chin and she blinked.
Behind hintJack was saying, "Jesus, will you look at that I"
"Now that is something I " Tak said.
"You say he is in there? George Harrison, the big colored man?"
"Yeah, he\; inside." At which point Lmya tugged his arm: "Kid, look
at that! Will you?"
"Huh? What?" He looked up.
The skyHe heard footsteps, lowered his eyes: the blonde girl was hurrying
down the street. Frowning, he looked up again.
-streamed with black and silver. The smoke, so low and limitless
before, had raddled into billows, torn and flung by Some high wind
that did not reach down to the street.
Hints of a moon struck webs of silver on the raveling mist.
He moved against Lanya\; shoulder (she too had glanced after the
gi·rl), all warm down his side. Her short hair brushed his a·rm. "I've
never seen it like that before!" And tlten, louder: "Yak, has it ever been
like that before?"
The Ruins of Morning 95
(Someday I'm going to die, he .thought irrelevantly, but shook the
thought away.)
"Damn!" Loufer took off his cap. "Not since I been here." He was
holding his jacket over his shoulder by one finger. "How do you like
that,lack? Maybe it's finaHy breaking up."
They started to the corner, still staring.
"That's the first time here I've seen tlte-" Then Lanya stopped.
They all stopped. He swallowed, hard: with his head back, it tugged
uncomfortably at his Adam's apple.
Through one rent, the lunar disk had appeared; tlten, as the aperlure moved with the wind, he saw a second moon!
Lower in the sky, smaller, it was in some crescent phase.
"Jesus'" Jack said. •
The smoke came together again, tore away.
"Now wait just a God-damn minute '" Tak said.
Once more the night was lit by tlte smaller, but distinctly lunar crescent. A few stars glittered near it. The smoke closed here, opened tltere:
The gibbous moon shone above it.
Before the bar door ,mother group had gatltered, craning at tlte violated night. Two, pulling a: bottle back and forth, came loose, came
close.
"What the hell-" The sky cleared again under two lights, crescent
and near-full-"is tltat?" Tak demanded.
Someone else said: "What do you tltink it is, a sun?"
"The moon'" One gestured with his foaming bottle.
"Then whati; that?"
One pulled tlte bottle from the other's hand. anotlter ... that
one's George!"
They reeled off, spilling liquor.
In the gathered group, people laughed. "You hear tltat, George? You
got a God-damn moon named after you!" and out of the laughter and
chatter, a louder laugh rose.
unya shrugged closer beneath his arm.
"Jesus ... " Jack whispered again.
"Not according to them," Tak said. "Come on. 11
"What is it?" Lanya asked again.
"Maybe it\; some kind of reflection. .. He flexed his fingers around
on her small shoulder. "Or one of those weather balloons. Like they
used to think were flying saucers."
"Reflected from what, on to what?" Tak asked.
96 Dhalgren
Flakes of smoke spun over. One or the other, and occasionally both,
moons showed. There was a breeze now. The sky was healing. Over
half the sky clouds had already coalesced. Voices came from in the bar
doorway:
"Hey. weilot a moon! And we got a George!"
"Shine on, shine on harvest George-'
"Oh man,June and George don't rhyme!"
("iak and Jack do," Lanya whispered, giggled, and puMed her harmonica from her pocket.)
"But you remember what he do to that little white girl-"
"Oh, shit, was that her name!"
Lanya blew harmonica notes in his ear. He pulled away ("Hey ... !")
and came back to her, perturbed. She reached up and held his forefinger. Something tickled his knuckle. She was brushing her lips
across the ruin of his th1!lmb's first joint. The shoutings died behind
them. Overhead, theIights blurred in returning clouds. She played lazy
music by his chest, following the ex-soldier and the ex-engineer. Her
motion pulled him. She paused to lell him, "You smell good.·
"Huh? Yeah, I guess I stink," and cringed.
"r mean it. Good. Like a pear somebody's soaked in brandy.·
"That\; what happens when Y01!l bum around for three weeks and
can't get a bath." She nuzzled the forking of his arm.
He thought she was funny. And liked her funniness. And realized
that it was becal!lSe she made it easier to Ilke ... whoever he was; and
came out of the thoughts trying not to smile. She played randomly.
He beat the paper and notebook on his thigh, ti}l he remembered
John whom he did not like, and stopped.
5
took for shadow in this double-lit mist. A dark communion in the
burtting streets between the landscape and the smarting senses suggests more sterile agomes. Clouds out of Control decoct anticipation.
What uSe can any of us have for two moons? The miracle of order has
ron out and I am left in an unmiracwous city where anytIting may happen. I don't need more intimations of disorder. It has to be more than
that! Search the smoke fOf the fire\; base. Read from the coals neither
sUCCess nor despair. This edge of boredom is as bright. I pass it, into
the dark rim. There is the deceiving warmth that asks nothing. There
are objects lost in double-light.
The Ruins of Morning 97
With the jollity of their progress through the night streets, the repeated exclamations and speculatiOns at the twinned satellites, moments
into Tak's dark stairway-footsteps pummeling around him, down,
across, then pummeling up-he realized he had no memory of the
. doorway through which they'd just entered out of the night, save the
memory of his exit that lingered from the morning .
• "A great idea!" Lanya, behind, was breathing heavily. "A Full George
party!" "If George was the full one," Tak said. "Excuse me; gibbous."
"How far up do you live?" Jack asked, ahead.
The orchid jogged on his hip. Notebook and newspaper-he'd read
none of the paper yet-were still clamped in clammy fingers.
"We'll be there in one more-Nope. I mis-counted," Tak called
down. "Were here already! Come on! It\; party time!"
Metal creaked on metal.
Both Lanya, behind, and Jack, ahead, were laughing,
Above is light. What else does this city cast up on its cloudy cover,
from ill-functioning streetlights, from what leaks tentatively out of
badly shaded doors and windows, from flame? Is it enough to illuminate another bright, brief, careening, but less-than-standard body?
6
He put the wine bottle on the roof\; thigh-high wall. Below; the street
lamp was a blurred pearl. He searched the dense and foggy distances,
was lost in them.
"What are you looking at?" She came up, surprising, behind.
·Oh." The night was thick with burnt odors. "r don't know."
She picked up the bottle and drank, "All right," and put it down;
then said, "You're looking for something. You've got your eyes all
squinched up. You were craning way out and ... oh, you can't see anything down there for the smoke!"
"The n-verl " he said.
"Hm?" She looked again.
"I canlt see the river ....
"What river? n
"When I came off the waterfront, across the bridge. This place, it was
like two blocks away. maybe. And then, when I first came up here, you
could just see the water, as though suddenly the river was a half a mile
off. It was right through there. But now I can't see ... " craning again.
98 Dhalgren
She said: "You couldn't see the river from here. It's nearly ... I don't
know exactly; but it's quite a way."
"I could this morning."
"Maybe, but I doubt it." Then she said: "You were here this morning?"
He said: "There isn't any smoke over there. I can't even make out
the lights from the bridge, or anything; even the reflections from the
places on the waterfront that're burning. Unless they've gone out."
"If they've gone out, the electricity's gone on somewhere else." Suddenly she pulled her shoulders together, gave a little shiver; sighed, and
looked up. And said, eventually: "The moon."
"What?D
"Do you remember," she asked, "when Ihey got the first astronauts
to the moon?!:!
"Yeah," he said. "I saw it on Tv. A whole bunch of us were over at
my friend's house."
"I missed itl unt:U the Rext morning. H she said. "But it was . ..
funny."
"What?"
She pulled her lips in between her teeth, then let them pop. "Do you
remember the next time you were outside and you looked up and saw
the moon in the sky instead of on television?"
Hefrowned.
"It was different, remember. I realized that for the last fifty thousand
science-fiction novels it had sdll been just a light hanging up there.
And now it was •.. a place. "
"I just figured somebody had taken a shit up theIe, and why weren't
they telling." He stopped laughing. "But it was different; yeah."
"Then tonight." She looked at the featureless smoke. "Because there
was another one, that you don't know if anybody's walked on, suddenly
both ohhem Were ... "
"Just lights again.'
·Or ... ' she nodded. "Something else." her elbow touched
his arm.
°Hey," Jack said from the doorway, "I think 1 better go now. I mean
... maybe I better go." He looked around the roof. The mist had
wrapped them in. "I mean," he said, "tok's awful drunk, you know?
He's sort of ... '"
"He isn't going to hurt you."
Lanya poised her quick laugh at the rim of amusement, started back,
and entered the cabin.
The Ruins of Morning 99
He picked up the wine and followed.
"Now hefetl! Tak announced, coming from the bamboo curtaiIL "I
knew I had some caviar. Got it on the first day up here." He grimaced.
"Too much, huh? But I like caviar. Imported." He held up the black jar
in his left hand. "Domestic." He raised the orange one in his right. His
cap was on the desk with his jacket. His head seemed very small on his
thick torso. "I got more stuff in there than you can twitch the proverbial stick at." He set the jars down among a dozen others.
"Isn't it sort ofIate ... " Jack's voice trailed off in the doorway.
"Christ," Lanya said, "what are you going to do with all this junk,
rak?"
"Late supper. Don't worry, nobody goes hungry up at the Fire
Wolf's."
He picked up a small jar (cut glass in scarred, horny flesh): " ... Spiced
Honey Spread ... '
"Oh, yeah." Tak arranged the breadboard on the edge of the desk.
"I've even tried some of that before. It's good." He swayed above pickled
artichoke hearts anet caponata, deviled ham, herring, pimento, rolled
anchovies, guava paste, pate. "And another glass of-" He raised the
bottle and splashed the liqUid around inside. "Jack, some for you?"
"Aw, no. Ifs getting pretty late."
"Here you go!" He pushed the glass into the boy's hand. Jack took
it because it would have dropped otherwise:
"Eh ... thanks."
" ... for me." Tak finished his and poured another. 'Come on, everybody, now you help yourselves. You like pimento?"
"Not just by its lonesome," Lanya protested.
"With bread, or ... cheese, here. Anchovies?"
"Look," Lanya said, "I'll do it."
Loufer gestured towardJack. "Now corne on, boy. You said you were
hungry. I got all this damn caviar and stuff."
"It's sort of ... ' Behind Jack, smoke filtered across the doorway.
u ••• well, late. D
UTak?"
"Hey, Kidd, here's a glass for you. "
"Thanks. Tak?"
"Yeah, Kidd? What can I do for you?"
"That poster.»
From the center picture, the black glared out into the room,
oiled teak belly gleaming under scuffed leather, his fist, a dark and
100 Dhalgren
gouged interruption on a dark thigh. The light soulCe had been yellow:
that made brass hints in tne nappy pubis. The scrotal skin was the color
and texture of rotten avocado rind. Between the thighs, a cock, thick
as a flashlight haft, hung p.usty. black and wormy with veins. The skin
of the right knee intimated a marvelous machine beneath. The left ear
was a coil of serpents. The brass light barred his leg, his neck, slurred
the oil on his nostrils.
"That's the spade who came into the bar, the one they named the
moon after."
"Yeah, that's George--George Harrison." Tak took the tOp alI another
jar, smelled it, scowled. "Some of the boys at Teddy's got him to pose
for that. He's a real ham. That ap.likes ,to get his picture ,taken more
than just about anything, you know? Long as he doesn't get too drunk,
he's a great guy. Ain't he beautiful? Strong as a couple of borses, too."
"Wasn't there something about some pictures in the paper of him
... raping some girl? That's what the newspaper man told me this
morning."
'Oh yeah." Tak put down another jar, drank more of his brandy.
'Yeah, rhat busmess with the white girl, in the paper, during the riot
Well, like I said: George just likes to get his picture taken. He's a big
nigger now. Might as well enjoy it. J would if 1 was him.'
"What is this, Tak ... octopus!" Lanya, with a wrinkled nose, bit.
'Sort of tough ... it tastes all right."
"Jesus!" Jack exclaimed. "That's salty!'
"Have some brand)'," Tak reiterated. "Spicy food is good with booze.
Go ahead. Drink some more."
"You know-" he still considered the poster-oJ saw that thing
hung up in a chutch this morning?"
"Ahl" Ta'k gestured with his glass. "Then you were down at Reverend Amy's. Didn't you know? Shes the chief distributor. Where do
you think J gOt my copy?'
He frowned at the poster, frowned at Tok (who wasn't looking),
frowned at the poster again.
Eyes of ivory. velvet lips, a handsome face poised between an expression disdainful and embarrassing. Was it ... theatrical? Perhaps
theatrical disdain. The background was a hOrizonless purple. He tried
to put this rough face with his memory of the astounding second moon.
"Try this!' Lanya exclaimed. "Lt's good."
It was. But mumbling through the tasteless crumbs under it, he
stepped outside and breathed deep in the thick smoke. He couldn't
The Ruins of Morning 101
smell it, but he felt his heart in his ears in a moment, very qUick and
steady. He sealChed for either blotted light. A rapist? he thought. An
exhibitionist? He is approaching the numinous: gossip; the printed
word; portents. Thrilled, he narrowed his eyes to sealCh the clouds for
George once more.
"Hey,' Lanya said. "How you feeling?'
IlTired."'
"1 left my blankets and stulI in the park. Let's go back.'
"Okay." He started to put his arm around her-she took his hand
in both of hers. She cupped his from the wrist, her fingers like orchid
blades. Blades closed, and she held his little finger, his forefinger, kissed
the horny palm, and would not look at his confusion. She kissed his
knuckles, opening her lips, and lay her tongue Her breath
warmed in the hair on his hand's back.
Her face was an inch away: he copld feel tho warmth of that too. In
his reiterate curiosity, and his embarrassment, he offered, obliquely,
"You know . .. the moon?"
She looked at him, still holding his fingers. 'What moon?'
"I mean ..• when we saw the two moons. And what you were talking about. Their bemg different."
'"Two moons?"
"Oh, come on now." He lowered his hand; hers lowered with it. "Remember when we came out of the bar?'
"Yes."
"And ,the night was all messed up and streaked?' He glanced at the
enveloping sky. fused and blurred.
"Yes."
"What did you see?"
She looked puzzled. "The moon.'
"How-" something awful at the base of his spine-"many?'-
clawed to his neck.
Her head went to the side. "How many?"
"We were all standing outside the bar, and in the sky we saw ... "
But she laughed and, laughing, dropped her face to his hand again.
When she looked up, she halted the sound to question. "Hey?' And
then, "Hey, I'm kidding you ... ?"
"Oh,' he said.
But she saw an answer that confused. "No, really, I'm just kidding.
What were you going to say about them?"
"Huh?ll
102 Dhalgren
"Yo .. were about to say something?'
"Naw, it?s nothing."
UUut ... 1"'
"Don't do that again. Don't kid like that. Not ... here.'
She looked around too when he said that. Then pushed her face
against his hand again. He moved his fingers between her lips. "I
won't," she said, "if you'll let me do this," and slid her mouth around
his wrecked thumb.
As expression releases the indicated emotion, as surface defines the
space enclosed, he felt a strange warmth. It grew behind his face and
made his breath shush out. "All right: he said, and, 'Okay," and then,
' ... Yes,' each more definite in meaning, each more tentatively spoken.
Tak pushed the door back hard enough to make ,the hinges howl.
He walked up to the balustrade, fmgering his fly and mumbling, "Shit!'
saw Umya and stopped. ·Sorry. I gotta take a leak.'
'What's the matter with she asked the swaying Loufer.
"What's the matter? Tonightl; trick isn't going to put out. Ust nighfs
is all caught up with the biggest fag-hag in the city.' His zipper hissed
open. ·Come on, I want to take a leak." He nodded to Lanya. ·You can
stay here, sweetheart. But he's gotta go away. I got this hangup. I'm pissshy in front of men.'
"Fuck alI, Tak," he said, and started across the roof.
She caught up, her head down, making a sound he thought was crying. He touched her shoulder, and she looked up at him in the midst
of a stifled giggle.
He sucked his teeth. "Let's go.'
"What about Jack? " she asked.
"Huh? FuckJack. We're not going to take him with us.'
"Oh, sure; I didn't mean ... " And followed him toward the stairwell.
"Hey, good night, Tak," he called. "I'U see you around.'
'Yeah,' Loufer said from the cabin door, going in: the hair on his
shoulder aDd the side of his head blazed with back-light.
"Good night,' !.anya echoed.
The metal door grated.
A flight into the dark, she asked, "Are you mad at Tak ... about
something?' Then she said: "I mean, hel; a sort of funny guy, Sometimes. But he's-'
"I'm not mad at him.'
"Oh." Their footsteps perforated ,the silence.
The Ruins of Morning 103
"1 like him." His tone spoke decision. "Yeah, he's a good guy." The
Dewspaper and the notebook were up under his arm.
She slipped her fingers through his in the dark; to keep from dropping the notebook, he had to hold her near.
At the bottom of the next flight, she asked, suddenly: "Do you care
if you don't know who you are?"
At the bottom of the next, he said, "No." Then he wondered, from
the way her footsteps qUickened (his quickened to keep up) if that, like
his hands, excited her.
She led him quickly and surely through the basement corridornoW the concrete was cold-and up. "Here's the door," she said, releasing him; she stepped away.
He couldn't see at all.
"Just a few stairs." She moved ahead.
He held the jamb unsteadily, slid his bare foot forward ... onto
board. With his other hand, he raised notebook and newspaper before
his face, thrust his forearm oul.
Ahead and below, she said, "Come on."
"Watch out for the edge," he said. His toes and the ball of his foot
went over the board side and dangled. "And those damn meat hooks."
"Huh ... ?" Then she laughed. "No-thatl; across the street!"
"The hell it is," he said. "When I came running out of here this
morning, I nearly skewered myself."
"You must have gotten lost-" she was still laughing-"in the basement! Come on, it's just a couple of steps down."
He frowned in the dark (thinking: There was a lamp on this street
corner. I saw it from the roof. Why can't I see anything ... ) let go the
jamb, stepped ... down; to another board, that squeaked. He still held
his arm up before his face, feeling for the swaying prongs.
"One of the corridors in the basement," she explained, "goes under
the street and comes up behind a door to the loading porch across from
here. The first rew times I came to visit tak, that happened to me too.
The first time, you think you're lOSing your mind."
"Huh?' he said. "Under the ... street?" He lowered his arm.
Maybe (the possibility came, as relieving as fresh air in these smokestilled alleys) he'd simply looked down from the roof on the wrong
Side; and that was why there was no street-light. His semiambidextrousll.ess was always making him confuse left and right. He came
down two more board steps, reached pavement.
He felt her take his wrist. "This way ... "
10'1 Dhalgren
She led him qUickly through up and down curbs, from
complete to near-complete darkness and back. It was more confusing
than the basement corridors. 1,I.We're in the park, now, aren't we ... 1"
he asked, minutes on. Not only had he missed the entrance, but, at the
moment he rose from his reveries to speak, he realized he <;lid not know
how many minutes on it was. Three? Thirteen? Thirty?
"Yes .. ." she said, wonderiag why he wondered.
They walked over soft, ashy earth.
"Here,' she told him. "We've reached my place.'
The trees rustled.
"Help me spread blanket.'
He thought: How can she see? A corner of blanket fell across his
fOOl. He dropped to his knees and pulled ,the edge straight; felt her pull;
felt her pull go slack.
"Take all your clothes off .. ." she said, softly.
He nodded, unbuttoned his shirt. He had known this was coming, too. Since when? This morning? New moons come, he thought,
and all of heaven changes; still we silently machinate toward the
joint of flesh and flesh, while the ground Slays still enough to walk,
no matter what above it. He unbuckled his pants, sHpped out of
them, and looked up to notice that he could see her a little, across
the blanket, a blot moving fUriously, rustling laces, jeans-a sneaker fell in grass.
He pushed off his sandal and lay down, naked, on his back, at the
blanket's edge.
"Where are you ... ?" she said.
"Here,' but it sounded, shakmg the mask of his face, more like a
grunt.
She fell against him, her flesh as warm as sunlight in tbe dark,
slipped on top of him. Her knees slid between his. Happily, his arms
enclosed her; 'he laughed, and rocked her to the side, while she tried
to fmd his mouth with hers, found it, pushed her tongue into it.
A heat, whose center was just behind his groin, built, layer around
layer, Hll it seemed to fill mm, knees to nipples. The bone behind her
crotch hair moved on his hip whHe she clutched his shoulders-but
he did not get an erection.
They rocked, kissed; he touched, then mbbed her breasts; she
touched, then rubbed his hand rubbing her; they kissed and hugged,
five? ten minutes? He grew apologetic. "r guess this isn't ... well, I
mean for you . .. »
The Ruins of Morning 105
Her head pulled back. "If you're worried about it,' she said, "you've
got toes, a tongue ... fingers .. ."
He laughed- "Yeah.' -and moved down: his feet, then his knees,
went off the blanket into grass.
With two fingers, he touched her cunt. She reached down to press
his hand against her. He dropped his mouth; she spread her fingers,
her hair pressed out between them.
The odor, like a blow against his face, brought back-was it from
Oregon?-an ax blade's first hack in some wet pine log. He thrust out
his tongue.
And his cock dragged agaiast the blanketing; the tenderer oval
pushed forward in the loose hood.
She held his head, hard, with one hand; held his two fingers, hard
against her hip, with her other.
He mapped the folds that fell, wetly, out, with his tongue; and the
gristly nut in the folded vortex; and the soft, granular trough behind
it. She moved, and held her breath for half a minute, gasped, held it
again; gasped. He let himself rub against the blanket, just a little, the
way he used to masturbate when he was nine. Then he crawled up onto
her; both her handS, thrust between her thighs, caught his cock: he
pushed into her. Her arms fought from beneath him, to lock, suddenly
and tightly, on his neck. Holding her shoulders, he pushed, and retreated, and pushed again, slowly; pushed again. Her hips roUed under
bis. Her heels walked up the blanket, ankles against his thighs.
She clutched his fist like a rock or a root-knob too big for her fingers. Hunching and hunching, he pressed the back of her hand into
grass: between her spread fingers, grass blades tickled his knuckles. As
he panted, and fell, and panted, she dragged it, by jerks, to the blanket; dragged up the blanket; held it, finally, against her cheek, her
mouth, her chin.
His chin, wet and unshaven, slipped against her throat. He remembered how she had sucked his thumb before and, taking a curious dare,
opened his fmgers and thrust three into her mouth.
The realization, from her movement (her breaths were loud,
long, and wet beside him, the underside of her tongue between his
knuckles hot), that it was what she had wanted, made him, perhaps
forty seconds after her, come.
He lay on her, shuddered; she squeezed his shoulders.
After a while, she practically woke him with: "Get all You're heavy.'
He lifted his chin. "Don't you ... Uke to be held afterwards?"
106 Dhalgren
"Yes." She laughed. "You're still heavy.'
"Oh," and he rolled-taking her with him.
She squealed; the squeal became laughter as she ended up on top of
him. Her face shook against his, still laughing. It was like something
she was chewing very fast. He smiled.
"You're not heavy," he said, and remembered her saying she was four
or eight pounds overweight; it certainly wasn't with fat.
m the circle of his arms, she snuggled down; one hand stayed loose
at his neck.
The contours of the ground were clear beneath his buttocks, back,
and legs. And there was a pebble (or something, under the blanket?)
under his shoulder (or was it a prism on his chain) ... there ...
"You all right?"
"Mmm-hm." He got it into a depression in the ground; so it didn't
bother him. "I'm fine."
He was drifting off, when she slid to his side, knees lapped with his
shins, head sliding't{) his shoulder. She moved one band on his belly
beneath the chain. Her breath tickled the hair at the top of his chest.
She said: "Its the kind of question you lose friends for ... But I'm curious: Who do you like better in hed, Tak or me?"
He opened his eyes, looked down at what would be the top of her
head; her hair brushed his face. He laughed into it, shortly and sharply:
"Taks been telling tales?"
"Back at the bar," she said, "while you were in the john.' Actually.
she sounded sleepy. "I thought he was jOking. Then you said you'd been
there in the morning."
"Mmmm.· He nodded. "What did he say?"
"That you were cooperative. But basically a cold fish.'
"Oh." He was surprised and felt his eyebrows, and his lower lip, rise.
"What do you think?",
She snuggled, a movement that went from her cheek in his armpit
(he moved his arm around her), down through her chest (he could feel
one breast slide on his chest; one was pressed between them so tightly he wondered if it wasn't uncomfortable for her), to her hips (his cock
rOSe between his thighs and fell against his beny), to her knees (he
clamped his together around hers) to her feet (he pushed his big toe
between two of hers: and she held it). "Intense •.. ft she said, pensively. "But lIike that.' •
He put his other arm around her. "I like you better," and decided
that he did. Suddenly he raised his head from the blanket, looked down
The Ruins of Morning 107
at her again: "Hey ... Do you have any birth-control stuff?" ,
She began to laugh, softly at first, her face turned into his shoulder,
then out full, rolling away from him to her back, laughing in the dark
"Whats so funny?" He felt the length where she'd been as cold now
as it had been warm,
"Yes. I have taken care of the birth-control ... 'stuff,' as you put it."
Her laughter went on, as light as leaf tipping leaf. "It's just your asking,' she told him at last, "sounds so gallant. Like manners from another age and epoch. I'm not used to it"
"Oh," he said, still not quite sure he understood. And, anyway, he
felt himself drifting again.
He wasn't sure if he actually slept, but carne awake later with her
arm moving sleepily against his; aroused, he turned to her, and at his
movement, she pulled herself half on top of him: She had been lying
there, already excited.
They made love again; and fell into sleep like stones-till one or the
other of them moved; and once more they woke, clinging.
So they made love once more; then talked-about love, about
moons ("You can't see them at all now," she whispered. "Isn't that
strange?"), about madness-and then made love again.
And slept again.
And woke.
And made love.
And slept.
House of the Ax
Beginning in this tone is, for us, a little odd, but such news stands out,
to your editor:' mind, as the impressive occurrenCe in our eccentric
history. Ernest Newboy. the most notable English-language poet t\'
emerge from Oceana, was born in Auckland in 1916. Sent to school
in England, at twenty-one (he tells us) he came back to New Zealand
and Australia to teach for six years, then returned to Europe to work
and travel.
Mr Newboy has been three times short-listed for the Nobel Prize,
which, if he receives it, will make him one in a line of outstanding figures in the twin fields of diplomacy and letters which includes Asturias,
5t-John Perse, and Seferis. As a citizen of a comparatively neutral country. he has been visiting the United States at an invitation to sit on the
United Nations Cultural Committee which has just adjourned.
Ernest Newboy is also the author ·of a handful of short stories and
novellas, collected and published under the title Stones (Vintage Pap .. back, 387 pp., $2.95), including the often anthologized long story.
"The Monument, U a disturbing and symbolic tale of the psychological
and spiritual dissolution of a disaffected Australian intellectual who
comes to live in a war-ravaged German town. Mr Newboy has told us
that, though his popular reputation rests on that slim volume of inci109
110 Dhalgren
sive fiction (your editor's evaluation), he considers them essentially experiments of the three years following the close of the War when he
passed through a period of disillusionment with his first literary comntitment, poetry. If nothing else, the popularity of Stones and "The
Monument" turned attention to the.three volumes of poems published
in the thirties and forties, brought together in Collected Poetry 1950
(available in Great Britain from Faber and Faber). To repeat something
of a catch-phrase that has been echoed by various critics: While writers about him caught the despair of the period surrounding the War,
Newboy, more than any other, fixed it in such light that one can lUCidly
see in it the genesis of so much of the current crisis. From his early
twenties, through today, Newboy has produced occasional, literary, and
philosophical essays to fill several volumes. They are characterized by
a precise and courageous vision. In 1969 he published the book-length
poem Pilgrimage, abstruse, surreal, often surprisingly humorous, and,
for all its apparent irreverence,. a profoundly religiOUS work. After several more volumes of essays, in 1975 the comparatively brief collection
of shorter poems written in the thirty-odd years since the War, Rictus,
appeared.
A quiet, retiring, scholarly man, Newboy has traveled for most of his
life through Europe, North Africa, and the East. His work is studded
with images from the Maori and the many cultures he has been exposed
to and explored, with his particular personal insight.
Newboy arrived in Bellona yesterday morning 'and is indefinite
aboilt the length of his stay. His comment to us when asked about his
visit was, after a reticent smile: ·Well. a week ago I wasn't intending to
come here at all. But I suppose I'm happy I did."
We are honored that a man with such achievement in English letters and a figure of such world admiration should ..•
"What are you doing?" she mumbled, turning from his side.
"Reading the paper.· Grass creased his elbows. He had wiggled free
of the blanket as far as his hips.
"Did it come out yet?" She raised her head in a haze of slept-in hair.
"It isn't that late ... 1"
"Yesterdays."
She dropped her head back. "Thats the trouble with sleeping out.
You can't do it paSt five o'clock in the morning.·
"I bet it's eight.' He spread the wrinkled page bottom.
"What_a opened her eyes and squinted-"you reading about?"
"Newboy. That poet."
DOh. yeah."
House of the Ax 111
"Imethim,1l
"You did?" She raised her head again, then twisted, tearing blankets
from his leg. "When?"
"Up at Calkins'."
She pulled up beside him, hot shoulder on his. Under the headline, NEWBOY IN TOWN, was a picture of a thin white-haired man in a
dark suit with a narrow tie, sitting in a chair, legs crossed, looking as
though ,there were too much light in his face. "You saw him?"
"When I got beat up. He came out and helped me. From New
Zealand; it sounded like he had some sort of accent."
"Told you Bellona was a small town." She looked at the picture.
"Hey, how come you didn't get inside then?"
"Somebody else was with him who raised a stink. A spade. Fenster.
He's the civil rights guy or something?"
She blinked at him. "You really are out meeting everybody.'
"r wish I hadn't met Fenster." He snorted.
"I told you about Calkins' country weekends. Only he has them
seven days a week.»
"How does he get time to write for the paper?"
She shrugged. "But he does. Or gets somebody to do it for him. » She
sat up to paw the blankets. "Where did my shirt g()?"
He liked her quivering breasts.
"It's under there.' He looked back at the paper, but did not read. "r
wonder if hes ever had George up there?"
"Maybe. He did that inlerview Ihing.·
"Mmmm.n
Lanya dropped back to the grass. "Hell. It isn't past five o'clock in
the morning. You know damn well it isn't."
"Eight," he decided. "Feels like eight-thirty," and followed her
glance up to the close smoke over the leaves. He looked down again,
and she was smiling, reaching for his head, pulling him, rocking, by
the ears, down: He laughed on her skin. "Come on! Let me gal"
She hissed, slow. ·Oh, I can for a while," caught her breath when
his head raised, then whispered, "sleep ... " and put her forearm over
her face. He lost himself in the small bronze curls under her arm, and
only loosened his eyes at faint barking.
He sat, puzzled. Barking pricked the distance. He blinked, and in
the bright dark of his lids, oily motes exploded. Puzzlement became
surprise, and he stood.
Blankets fell down his legs.
He stepped on the grass, naked in the mist.
lIZ Dhalgrtn
Far away a dog romped and turned in the gap between hills. A
woman followed.
Anticipatory wonder caught in the dizzy fatigue of morning and
sudden standing.
The chain around bis body had left red marks on the underside of
his forearms and the front of his belly where he'd leaned.
He got on his pant!;.
Shirt open OVer tears of jewels, he walked down the slope. Once he
looked back at Lanya: She had rolled over on ber st<lmach, face in the
grass.
He walked toward where the woman (the redbead, from the bar)
followed behind Muriel.
Hefastened one shirt button before she saw him. She turned on Sensible walking shoes and said, "Ah, hetlo. Goad morning."
Around her Reck, the jewels were a clutteted column of light.
"Hi." He pulled his toes in in the glaSS, shy. "I saw your dog last
night, at that bar."
"Oh, yes. And I saw you. You look a little beller this morning. Got
yourself cleaned up. Slept in the park?"
"Yeah."
Where candlelight had made her seem a big-boned wbore, smokelight and a brown suit took all the meretricious rtOm her rough, red
hair and made her an elementary-school assistant principal.
"You walk your dog here?"
An assistant principal with a gaudy necklace.
"Every morning, bright and early ... urn, rm going to the exit nOw."
·Oh," and then decided her tentativeness was invitation.
They walked, and Muriel ran up to snilfhis band, nip at it.
"Cut tbat out," she demanded. "Be a good dog."
Muriel barked once, thell. trotted ahead.
"What's your name?" he asked.
"Ah I" she repeated. "I'm Madame Brown. Munel went over and
barked at you last night, didn't she? Well, she doesn't mean anything
by it."
"Yeah. I guess not."
"About all you need now is a comb-" she frowned at him-"and a
towel, and you will be baok in shape." She released her shrill and astoundinglaughter. "There's a public john over there where I always see
the people from the going to wash up." nen she looked at
him seriously. "You're not with the cOmmune there, are you?"
14No."
"Do you want a job?"
"Huh?"
House of the Ax 113
"At least you're not a long-hair," she said. "Not very long, anyway.
I asked you if you wanted a job."
"I wear sandals," he said, "when I put anything on my reet at all."
"That's all right. Dh, heavens, I don't care! I'm just thinking of the
people you'd be working for."
"What kind of work is it?"
"Mainly cleaning up, or cleaning out I suppose. You are interested,
aren't you? They'll pay five dollars an hour, and those aren't the sort
of wages you can sneeze at in Bellona right through here."
IISure I'm interested!" He swa-Howed in surprise. "Where is it?"
They approached twin lions. Madame Brown put he. hands behind
her back. Muriel brushed the hem of her skirt. The glut of chain and
glass could catch no glitter In this light. a family. Do you know
where the Labry Apartments are?" To his shaking head: "I guess you
haven't been here very long. This family, now, they're nice, decent people. And they've been very helpful to me. 1 used to have my office over
there. You know there was a bit of confusion at the beginning, a bit of
damage."
"I heard about some of it"
"A lot of vandalism. Now that irs settled down some, they asked me
if I knew some young man who would help them. You mustn't take
the long-hair thing seriously. Just clean yourself up a little-though it
probably isn't going to be very clean work. The Richards are fine people. They've just had a lot of trouble_ We all have. Mrs Richards gets
easily upset by ... anything strange. Mr Richards perhaps goes a little
too far in trying to protect her. They've got three very nice children."
He pushed his hair from his forehead. "I don't think it's going to
grow too much in the next couple of days."
"There I You do understand'"
"It's a good job."
"Oh, it is. It certainly is," She stopped at the lions as though they
marked some far more important boundary. "Thats the Labry Apartments, up on 36th. It's the four hundred building. Apartment 17-E.
Come up there any time in the afterJl.oon."
"Today1"
"Certainly today. If you want the job.'
"Sure." He felt relief from a pressure invisible till now through its
114 Dhalgren
ubiquitousness. He remembered the bread in the alley: its cellophane
under the street lamp had flashed more than his or her fogged baubles.
"You have an office there. What do you do?"
"I'm a psychologisl."
and didn't narrow his eyes. "I've been to psychologists. I
know something about it, 1 mean."
"You do?" She touched the lion\; cheek, not leaning. "Well, 1 think
of myself as a psychologist on vacation right now." Mocking him a
little: "I only give advice between the houts of ten and midnight, down
at Teddy\;. That\; if you'D have a drink with me." But that mocking was
friendly.
"Sure. If the job works out."
"Go on over when you get ready. Tell whoever's there that Mrs
Brown-Madame Brown is the nickname they've given me at Teddy's,
and since 1 saW you there 1 thought you might know me by it-that
Mrs Brown told you. to come up. POSSibly I'll be there. But they'll put
you towork."
"Pive dollars"aR hour?"
"I'm afraid it isu't that easy to find trustworthy workers now that
we!ve got ourselves into this thing." She tried to look straight up under
her eyelids. "Oh no, people you can trust are getting rarer and rarer.
And you!" Straight at him: "You're wondering how 1 can trust you?
Well, I've seen you before. And you know, we reaUy ate at that point.
1 begin, really, to think its too much. Really too much."
"Get your morning paper!"
"Muriel! Oh, now Muriel! Come back here!"
"Get your morning-Hey, there, dog. Quiet down. Down girl!"
"Muriel,come back here this instantl"
"Down! There. Hey, Madame Brown. Got your paper right here.·
Maroon bells f1appiFlg, Faust stalked across the street. Muriel danced
widdershins about him.
"Hello, old girl"
"Good morning there," Madame Brown said. "1t is about time for
you to be along,]oaquim, isn't it?"
"Eleven-thirty. by the hands on the {lId church steeple." He cackled
"Hi there; hi there, young fellow," handing one paper, handing another.
Madam Brown folded hers beFleath her arm.
He let his dangle, while Faust howled to no one in particular, "Get
your morning paper," and went On down the street. "Bye, there,
Madame. Good morning. Get your paper!"
House of the Ax 115
"Madame Brown?" he asked, distrusting his resolve.
She was looking after the newspaper man.
are those?"
She looked at him with perfect blankness.
"I've got them." He touched his chest. "And ]oaquim's got a little
chain tight around his neck."
"I don't knOw." With one hand, she touched her own cheek, with
the other, her own elbow: Her sleeve was some cloth rough as burlap.
"You know, I'm really not sure. 1 like them. 1 think they're pretty. 1 like
having a lot of them."
"Where did you get them?" he asked, aware he broke the custom
Faust had so carefully defined the day before. Hell, he was still uneasy
with her dog, and with her transformation between smoke- and candlelight.
"A little friend of mine gave them to me." She had the look, yes, of
someone trying not to look offended.
He shifted, let his knees bend a little, his toes go, nodded.
"Before she left the city. She left me, left the city. And she gave me
these. You see?D
He'd asked. And felt better for the violence done, moved his arm
from the shoulder ... his laughter surprised him, broke out and bec"mehuge.
Over it, he heard her sudden high howl. With her fIst on her chest,
she laughed too, yes!" squinting. "She did! She really did. 1 was
never so surprised in all my life! Oh, it was fUnny-1 ,don't mean funny
peculiar, though it certainly was. Everything was, back then. But it was
funny ha-ha. Ha-ha-ha-haaaaa.· She shook the sound about her.
"She-" almost still-"brought them to me in the dark. People shouting around out in the halls, and none of the lights working. Just the
£lickeringcoming around the edge of the shades, and the terrible roaring outside ... Oh, I was scared to death. And she brought them to me,
in handfuls, wound them around my neck. And her eyes ... " She
laughed again, though that cut all smile from him. "It was strange. She
wound them around my neck. And then she left. 'here.· She looked
down oVer the ,accordion of her neck, and picked through the loops. "I
wear them all the time." The accordion opened. "What do they mean?"
She blinked at him. "I don't knOw. People who wear them aren't too
anxious to talk about them. I'm certainly not. " She leaned a little closer. "You're not either. Well, I'll respect that in you. You do the same."
Now she folded her hands. "But I'll teU you something: and, re",lIy,
116 Dhalgren
there's no reason behind it, I suppose, other than that it seems to work.
But I trust people who have them just a little more than those who
don't." She shrugged. 'Probably very silly. But it's why I offered you
that job."
"Oh."
"1 suspect we share something."
·Something happened," he said, "when we got them. Like you said.
That we don't like to talk about.»
"Then again, it could be nothing more than that we happen to be
wearing the same ... » She rattled the longest strand.
·Yeah. " He buttoned another button. "It could be."
·Well.I'Il drop in on you at the Richards'later in the afternoon. You
will be there?"
He nodded. "Four hundred, on 36th Street. .. '
"Apartment 17-E," she finished. "Very good. Murie!?"
The dog clicked back from the gutter.
"We'll be going now."
·Oh. Okay. And thanks."
'Perfectly welcome. perfectly welcome. I'm sure." Madame Brown
nodded, then ambled down the street. Muriel caught up, to cin:le her,
this time diesel
He walked barefoot through the grass, expectation and confusion
bobbling. Anticipation ·of labor loosened in his body. At the
fountain, he let the water spurt in his eyes before he flooded and
slushed, with eonapsing cheeks, water between filmed teeth. With his
forearm he blotted the tricklings, squeegeed his eyelids with rough,
toad-wide fingers, then picked up his paper, all-d, blinking wet lashes,
wenl back up to the trees.
Lanya still lay OR her belly. He sat on the drab folds, Her feet, toes
in, stuck from under the blanket. An olive twist layover the trough
of her spine, shiFting with breath. He touched her wrinkled instep,
moved his palm to her smooth heel He slid his first and second finger on either side of the tendon there. The heer of his hand pushed
back the blanket from her calf, slowly, smoothly, all the way till pale
veins tangled on the back of her knee. His hand lay On the slope of her
thigh.
Her calves Were smooth.
His heart, beating fast, slowed.
Her calves were unscarred.
He breathed, and with it was the sound of air in the grass around.
House of the Ax 117
Her calves had no scratch.
When he took his hand away, she made some slumber sound and
movement. And didn't wake. He opened todays paper and put it on
top of yesterday's. Under the date,July 17, 1969, was the headline:
MYSTERIOUS RUMORS!
MYSTERIOUS LIGHTS!
Would your editor ever like some pictures with this one! We, unfortunately, were asleep. But from what we can gather, shortly after midnight
last night--so far twenty-six versions of the Story have come in, with
contradictions enough to oblige our registering an official editorial
doubt-the fog and smoke blanketing Bellona these last months were
torn by a wind at too great an altitude to feel at street level. Parts of
(he sky were cleared, and the full-or near full_moon was, allegedly,
visible-as well as a crescent moon, only slightly smaller (or slightly
larger?) than the fi:rst!
The excited verSions from wRich we have culled our.Own report
contain many discrepancies. Here are some: The full orb was the usual
moon, the crescent was the intrUder.
The crescent was the real moon, the full, the impostor. A young student says iliat, in the few minutes these downright Elizabethan portents were revealed, he made out markings on the full disk that prove
it was definitely not our moon.
Two hours later, someone came into the office (the only person so
far who claims to have caught any of this phenomenon through an admittedly low-power telescope) to assure us the full disk definitely was
the moon, while the crescent was bogus.
In the six hours since the occurrence (as we write, intD the dawn),
explanations offered the Times have ranged from things so sciencefictiony we do not pretend to understand their arcane machinery,
down to the all-purpose heat lightning and weather balloon, perennial explanations for the UFO.
I pass on, as typical, OBe comment from our own PrQfessor Wellroan, who was observing from the July gardens with several other
guests: "One, we all agreed, was nearly full; the other was definitely
cr«SCent. 1 pointed out to the Colonel, Mrs Green, and Roxanne and
Tobie, who were with me, that the crescent, which was lower in the
sky, was convexed away froro the bright area of the higher moon.
Moons do not light themselves; their illumination comes from the sun.
lIB Dhalgren
Even with two moons, the sun can only be in on. direction from them
both; no matter which phases they are in, if they are both visible in the
same of the sky; both should be light on the same side-which
was not the case here.'
To which your editor can only say that any "agreement," "certainty. II or udefiniteness:n about ,these mooDS are cast into serious doubtunless we are prepared to make even more preposterous speculations
about the rest of cosmos ... ?
No.
We did not see it.
Which leaves us, finally, in this editorial position: We are sure something happened in the sky last night. But to venture what it was would
be absurd. Brand neW moons do not appear. In the face. of the nighes
hysteria, we should like to point out, that whatever happened
is explicable: Things are-though this, admittedly, is no guarantee we
shall e.ver have the explicatiOn.
What seems, both oddly and interestingly, to have been agreed on
by all who witnessed, and must therefore be accepted by all who did
not, is the name for this new light in the night: George.
The impetus to appelation we can only guess at; and what we guess
at we do not approve of. At any rate, ,on the rails of rumor, greased with
apprehension, the name had spread the city by the time the first report
reached us. The only final statement we can make with surety: Shortly after midnight, the moon and something called George. easy enough
to mistake for a moon, shone briefly on Bellona.
2
"What are you doing,' she whispered through leaves, "now?"
SNent, he continued.
She stood, shedding blankets, came to touch his shoulder, looked
down over it. "Is that a poem?"
He grunted, transposed two words, guawed at his thumb cuticle,
then wrote them back.
"Urn . .. ' she said, "do you mean making a hole through something,
or telling the future?"
"Huh?" He tightened his crossed legs under the notebook. "Telling
the future."
"A-u-g-u-r."
"Whoever wrote this notebook spells it differently on another page."
House of the Ax 119
He flipped pages across his knees to a previous, right-hand entry:
A word sets images f1yingfrom which auguries w. read . ..
"Oh ... he did spell it right. " Back on the page where he had been
writing, he crossed and recrossed his own kakograph till the bar of ink
suggested a word beneath half again as long.
"Have you been reading in there?" She kneeled beside him. "What
do you think?"
UHm?D
"r mean ... the guy who wrote that was strange."
He looked at her. "rve just been using it to write my own things.
It's the only paper I've got, and he leaves one side of each page blank."
His hack slumped. ·Yeah. Hes strange," but could not understand her
expression.
Before he could question it with one of his, she asked, "Can I read
what you're doing?"
He said, ·Okay,· qUickly to see what it would feel Uke.
"Are you sure its all right?"
·Yeah. Go on. It's finished anyway.'
He handed her the notebook: His heart got loud; his tongue dried
stickily to the floor of his mouth. He contemplated his apprehension.
Little fears at least, he thought, were amusing. This one was large
enough to joggle the. whole frame.
Clicking his pen point, he watched her read.
Blades of dangled forward about her face like orchid petals,
till-"Stop [hat! "-they flew back.
They ren again.
He put the pen in his shirt pocket, stood up, walked around, first
down the slope, then up, occasionally glancing at her, kneeling naked
in leaves and grass, reet sticking, wrinkled soles up, from under her buttocks. She would say it was Silly, he decided, to show her independence.
Or she would Oh and Ah and How wonderful it to death, convinced
that wonld bring them closer. His hand was at ,the pen again-he clicked
it without taking it from his pocket, realized what he was doing,
stopped, swallowed, and walked some more. Lines on Her Reading Lines
on Her he pondered as a future title, but gave up on what to put beneath
it; that was too hard without the paper itself, its light red matgin, its
pale blue grill.
She read a longtime.
120 DhaZgren
He came back tWice to look at the top of her head. And Went away.
!tIt .. . n
He turned.
" ... makes me feel ... odd." Her expression was even stranger.
"What," he risked, "does that mean?" and lost: it sounded either
pontifical or terrified.
"Come here ... ?t)
"Yeah." CrQuching beside her, his arm knocked hers; his hair
brushed hers as he bent. "What ... ?"
Bending With him, she ran her finger beneath a line. "Here, where
you have the words in reverse order from the way you have them up
here--I think, if somebody had just described that to me, I wouldn't
have found it very interesting. But actually reading it- all four timesit gave me chilIs. But I guess that!; because it works so well With the
substance. Thank you." She dosed the notebook and handed it back.
Then she said, 'Well don't look so surprised. Really, 1 liked it. I..efs see:
I'm ... delighted at its skill, and moved by its ..• well, substance.
Which is surprising, because I didn't think I was going to be.' She
frowned. "Really, you ... are staring something fierce, and it makes me
nervous as hell." But she wouldn't look down.
"You Just like it because you know me." That was also to see what
it felt like.
"POSSibly."
He held the notebook very tight, and felt numb.
"I guess-" she moved away a little-"somebody liking it or not
doesn't really do you any good."
"Yeah. Only you're scared they won't."
"Well, r did." She started to say more, didn't. Was that a shrug? Finally, she looked from beneath the overhanging limbs. "Thank you."
·Yeah," he said almost with relief. Then, as though suddenly remembering: "Thank you!"
She looked back, confusion working through her face toward some
other expression.
"Thank you," he repeated, inane!y, palms pressing the notebook to
his denim thighs, groWing wet. "Thank you. "
The other expression'was un
derstanding.
His hands worked across oach other like crabs, crawled round himself to hug his shoulders. His knees came up (the notebook dropped
between them) to bump his elbows. A sudden welling ·of ... was it
"I got a job!" His body tore apart; he £lopped, spread-eagle,
on hIS back. "Hey, I got ajob!"
House of the Ax 121
"Huh?"
"While you were asleep." Pleasure rushed outward into hands and
feet. "That lady in the bar last night; she came by With her dog and gave
merhisjob,"
"Madame Brown? No kidding. What kind of job?" She rolled to her
stomach beside him.
"For this family. Named Richards." He twisted, because the chain
was gnawing his buttocks. Or was it the notebook's Wire spiral? "Just
cleaning out junk." .
"Wen there's cerlainly enough junk-" she reached down, tugged
the book loose from beneath his hip-"around Bellona to clean out."
She lay it above his head, propped her chin on. her forearms. "!'
she mused. "Katherine Mansfield onCe described San FrancISCO, m a
letter to Murray, as living on the inside of a pearl. Because of all the
fog." Beyond the leaves, the sky was darkly luminous. "See.» Her head
rell to the side. "I'm literate too.»
"r don't think-" he frowned-"I've ever heard afKatherine ... ?"
"Mansfield.' Then she raised her head: "Was the reference in the
thiog you wrote, to that Mallarme poem ... " She frowned at the grass,
started tapping her fingers. "Oh, what is it ... !"
He watched her trying to retrieve a memory and wondered at the
process.
"Le Cantique de SaintJean! Was that on purpose?"
"I've read some Mallarme ... " He frowned. "But just in those Portuguesetranslauons Editora put out ... No, it wasn't on
pnrpose I don't think ... "
·Portuguese." She pnt her head back down. "To be sure." Then she
said: "It is like a pearl. I mean here in Bellona, Even though it's all
smoke, and not fog at all,"
He said: "Five dollars an hour.'
She said: "Hm?"
"That's what they're going to pay me. At the job."
"What do you want with five dollars an hour?" she asked, quite
seriously. .
Which seemed so silly, he decided not to insult her by answenng.
"The Labry Apartments,' he went On. "Four hundred, ThirtySixth Street, apartment seventeen-E. I'm supposed to go, up there this
afternoon." He turned to look at her. "When I come back, we could
get together again ... maybe at that bad" .,
She watched him a moment. "You want to get together agam, don t
you." Then she smiled. "That's nice.»
I
I
122 Dhalgren
:1 wonder if its late enough to think about going Over there?"
Make love to me once more before you go."
He his face, stretched. "Naw. I made love to you the last
two Urnes. He let his body go, glanced at her. "You make love to me this time."
Her frown fell away before, laughing, she leaned on his chest. He touched her face. •
Then her frown carne back. "You washed!" She looked surprised
He cocked his head up at her. "Not very much. In the john
,the;e, I splashed some water on my face and hands. Do you mind?"
N?_ 1 wash, mysell, qUite ,thoroughly; twice-occasionally even three nIDes a day. I was just surprised .•
He his fingers across her upper lip, beside her nose, over her
cheek-hke trolls, he thought, watching them.
Her green eyes blinked. '
"Well," he said, "its not something I've ever been exactly famous for. So doJlltworry."
Just as if she had forgotten the taste of him and was curious to remember, she lowered her mouth to his. Their tongues blotted all sound
breath while, for the ... fifth time? Fifth time, they made love.
The glass in the right-hand door was unbroken.
He opened the left: A web of shadows swept on a floor he first
thought was gold-shot blue marble. His bare foot told him it was plas. tic. It looked like stone ...
. The was covered with woven, orange straw-no, the heel of hIS palm saId that was plastic too.
Thirty away; in the center of the lobby':""lighting fixtures, he
dozen grey globes hung, all different heights, like dmosaureggs.
. From must have been a pool, filled with chipped blue rock, a
thm, ugly; Iron SCUlpture jutted. Passing nearer, he realized it wasn't a
sculpture aII, but a young, dead tree.
He hunched his shoulders, harried by.
The -covered partitioning wall beside him probably hid mail- boxes. Cunous, he stepped around it.
r.:'etal doors twisted and gaped-like three rows, suddenly swung
vertIcal (the thought struck with unsettling immediacy), of ravaged
graves. Locks dangled by a screw, or were missing completely. He
House of the Ax 123
assed along them, stopping to look at one or another defaced namebearing the remains of Smith, Howard . . .-
On the top row, three from the end, a smgle box had ,eIther been repaired, or never prised: Richards: 17-E, white letters from
the small black window. Behind the grill slanted the red, white, and
blue edging of an airmail envelope.
He carne out from the other side of the wall, hurried across the lobby.
One elevator door was half-open on an empty shaft, from which
drifted hissing wind. The door was coated to look like wood, but a dent
at knee level showed it was black metal. While he squatted, fingering
the edge of the depression, something clicked: a second elevator door
beside him rolled open.
He stood up, stepped back.
There were nO lights in the other car.
Then the door on the empty shaft, as if in sympathy; also finished
opening. .
Holding his breath and his notebook tight, he stepped mto the car.
"17" lit his finge<tip orange. The door closed. The number was the
only light. He rose. He wasn't exactly afraid; emotion was in
solmion. But anything, he understood over hIS shallow breath, mIght
set it in fantastic shapes.
"17" went oul: the door opened on dimness.
At one end of the beige hall, an apartment door stood wide; grey
light smoked through. At the other, in the ceiling-globe, at least one
bulb worked.
He passed 17-B, l7-C, 17-D, nearing the globe.
Mter the third ring (and practically a minute between), he decided to leave: And walk down the steps, because the pitch dark elevator was too spooky.
'Hello ... ? Who is it. .. ?
"Madame-Mrs Brown sent me.2)
"Oh.· Things rattled. The door rasped on two inches of chain. A
WOman perhaps just shy of fifty; with shadowed hair and pale eyes,
looked at him above the links. "You're the young man she said she'd
send to help?"
"yeah,"
"Oh,» she repeated. "Oil,' closed the door and opened it again without the chain. "Oh."
He stepped il1 ,on green carpet, She stepped back to look at him; he
began to feel uncomfortable, and dirty; and nervous.
12'1- Dhalgren
"Edna told you what we wanted?"
"Cleaning," he said. "YOlit've gOt some junk to move?"
"And mOving-"
Two thudS, and two men'S loud laughing was joined by a woman\;.
They both looked down at the Acrolan.
"-to an apartmeDt higher up in Ihe building," she said. "The floors,
the walis of these buildings a·re so thin. Everything goes ,through.
Everything." When she looked up, he thought: Why is she so unCOmfortable ... am I making her UBcomfortable? She said, "We want you
to help clear out the place upstails. It'S On the nineteenth floor, at the
other end of the halt It has a balcony. We thought that would be nice.
We don't have a balcoDY in this apartment."
"Hey; Mommal is ........ 1J •
He recognized her when she was half iDto the hall.
"Yes, June?"
"Oh ... " which waSD't recognition, though she held the wall and
blinked at him. aer yellow bile swung to hit her shoulders. She
frowned by the green wall,just paler ,thaD the carpet. "Is Bobby here?"
"1 sent him down for SOme bread."
"Oh,ll and into her room.
"I'm," pausing till he looked back at her, "MIS Richards. My husband,
Arthur, will be here very soon DOW. But come in, and I'll explain just
what we want done."
The living room was all picture windows. Beyond half-raised Venetian blindS, a hill of patchy grass rolled between several brick high-rises.
"Why don' t you sit-" her finger fell from her chin to point- "there."
. "r didn't get" chance to wash too well, this morning, and I'm pretty messy,· then realized that was just the reason she'd picked that particular chair. "No thanks."
"You're living . .. ?
"In the park. n
"Sit down," she said. "Please. Please sit down."
He sat, and tried not to pull his baFe foot behind his sandal.
She balanced at the edge of the L-shaped couch. "19-A where we
want to move is, well frankly, a mess. The apartment itself is in good
condition, the walls, the windows-so many windows got broken. We
wrote to Management. But I wouldn't be surprised if they've lost the
letter. Everything's so inefficient. So many people have left.'
A rattling, with thumps, moved outside in the hall: Then, someone
punched the door!
House of the Ax 125
While he tried to fix his surprise, tattered whispers outside raveled
with laughter.
Mrs Richards sat straight, eyes closed, small knuckles against her
stomach, her other hand mashing the couch. The loose flesh between
the ligaments over her collar pulsed either with slow heart beats or
quick breathing.
"Ma'am ... ?"
She swallowed, stood up.
They punched again: he could see the chain shake.
"Go away!" Her hands were claws now. "Go away! 1 said go away!"
Footsteps-three or four paile, one, high to echo.
"Mother ... ?" June rushed in.
Mrs Richards opened her eyes, her mouth, and took a breath.
"They've done that-" turning to him-"twice today. Twice. They only
did it once yesterday."
June kept raising and lowering her knuckle to and from her mouth.
Behind her the wall was covered with rough green paper, shelves of
plants in brass pots, unwaterably high.
"We're going to mo'lle into another apartment." Mrs Richards took
another breath and sat. "We wrote to Management. We haven't got an
answer, but we're going to anyway."
. He put his notebook on the table beside the chait and looked at the
door. "Who are they?"
"I don't knOw. I don't know; I don't care. But they're about-" she
paused to pull herself together-"about to drive me mad. I think
they're ... children. They've gotten into the apartment doWBStairs. So
many people have left. We're going to move upstairs."
June kept looking over her shoulder. Her mother said: "It must be
very difficult for you, living in the park."
He nodded.
"You've known Mrs Brown a while? It's nice of her to send somebody to help. She goes out, meets people. Myself, 1 just don't feel safe
walking around the city."
"Mother hardly ever goes out," JUDe said, very fast, yet still with the
hesitancy he remembered from last night.
"It isn't safe, and I don't see any reason for a woman to take that
sort of chance. Pemaps if! weFe someone else I wouldn't feel·that way."
She smiled. Her hair was salted brown, recently and Simply done. "How
long can YOlit work?"
"As long as you want, I guess.'
126 Dhalgren
"I mean how many hours? Today?"
"The rest of the day, if you want. It's pretty late now. But I'll come
earlier tomorrow."
"I'm ,talking about the light."
"Light?"
"The lights aren't working in most of the apartments."
"Oh, yeah. Well, I'll work till it gets dark. What time is it now?"
"The clocks." Mrs Richards turned up her hands. "The clocks have
stopped."
"Your ,elecUicitys out?"
"All except one outlet in the kitchen. For the refrigerator. And that
goes off too sometimes. n ..
"In the hall, there's a light on. Ana the elevator's working. You could
run a cheater in."
Mrs Richards looked puzzled.
"An extension cord. From the hall light, into your apartment. that
would give you some electricity."
"Oh." Lines deepened in her forehead. "But then we'd lose the hall
light, wouldn't we? We have to have some light in the hall. That would
be just 100-"
"You get a double socket. You put a bulb in one and run a cord from
the other, under the door."
"From the hall?"
"Yeah. That's what I was talking about."
"Oh." She shook her head. "But the hall lights aren't on our utilities
bill. Management wouldn't be very happy about that. They're strict here.
You see, the halilights, they're on another-" Her hands fluttered-
"meter. 1 don't think we could do that. If someone saw ... " She laughed.
"Oh no, this isn't that kind of place."
"Oh," he said. "Well, you're moving. So I guess you don't have to.
The apartment yOltre going to has electricity?"
"One of the things we have to find out.l don't know yet." Her hands
went back together in her lap. "Oh, 1 hope it does!"
"I'll work till it gets dark, Mrs Richards. "
"Very good. Oh, yes, that'll be fine. At least you'll be able to get started today."
"Maybe you betler ask your husband about the extension cord. I
could do it for you. I used 10 be a super .•
II.Wereyou?"
"Yeah. And I could do it, no trouble.'
House of the Ax 127
"r will ... " She pinched at her skirt, noticed, then smoothed it. "But
I don't think Management would go along with that. Oh no, I don't
think so at all."
The door bell rang twice.
"That's Bobby!" from June.
"Ask who it is!"
"Who is it?"
Muffied: "Me."
The chain rattled loose.
'Okay, 1 got your-'
June interrupted him: "You know they came back and did it again!
You didn't see anybody, in the halls, did you?"
"No .. . ?" Bobby's questioningwas toward the living room. "Who's he?"
Bobby (fourteen?) was holding a loaf of bread too tightly. Around
his left wrist, in a bright bracelet, were half a dozen loops of the optical chain.
"Come in, Bobby. This is a young man Edna Brown sent over.'
"Gee." Bobby stepped into the living room. Blond as his sister,
where her features suggested shyness, his sharper nose, his fuller
mouth hinted belligerence. Under his arm was a newspaper. "Are you
just living out in the street, huh?"
He nodded.
'You want,(Q use the bathroom or wash or something?"
"Bobby!" from June.
"Maybe," he said.
Mrs Richards laughed. "Isn't it rather difficult for you, and dangerous?H
"You ... have to keep your eyes open." That sounded inane enough.
"We'll go upStairs and look around."
"I wanna stay and read the-"
"We'll go together, Bobby. All of us .•
"Oh, Bobby," June said, "come on!"
Bobby stalked through the living room, threw 'Ihe paper atlhe coffee table, said, "Okay," and went into the kitchen. "I have to put the
bread away firs!."
"Well, put it away," Mrs Richards said. "Then we'll go."
"I could only find half a loaf," Bobby called.
"Did you ask for a whole one?" Mrs Richards called back. "I'm sure
if you'd asked them politely for a whole loaf, Ihey would ,have tried to
find one for-"
128 Dhalgren
"There wasn't anybody in the store."
"Oh, Bobby-"
"I left the money."
"But you should have waited for somebody to come back. Suppose
someone had seen you going out. They wouldn't have known you'd-"
"I did wait. Why do you think I was gone so long. Hey, this has got
mold in it."
"Oh, noaa," Mrs Richards cried.
"Not a lot," from the kitchen. "Just a little spot on one corner."
"Does it go all the way through?'
"It's on the second slice. And the third-'
"Oh stop tearing in itl" Mrs Richards exclaimed, punched the cushion, stood, and followed her son into the kitchen. "Let me see."
Perhaps it was discomforting lUCidity centered in the recapitulation:
hesaid to June: "Last night, did you ever find- ?"
Cellophane rattled from the kitchen.
By the door June's eyes widened in recognition-fmally. Her
forefinger brushed Ii.r lips awkwardly for silence, brushed, and
brushed again, till it wiped all meaning from the gesture.
She blinked.
The ceRophane rattled.
Bobby came out, sat in front of the coffee table, and pulled the paper
onto his lap. When he saw his sister, he cocked his head, frowning,
then looked back at the paper, while June's hand worked down the
front of her sweater to her lap.
"It's through," announced Mrs Richards. "All the way through. Well,
it isn't very large. Beggars can't be choosers." She came into the living
room. "We can cut it out, and all have sandwiches with little rings in
them. We are all beggars till this ,thing gets straightened out, you knOw.
Are you reading that again?"
Mrs Richards put a fist against her hip.
Bobby did not look up.
"What is it talking about today?" in a gentler tone. The fISt dropped.
Bobby read on.
He said, "Ihat whole business last nlghl, with the mOORS."
ItWhat?n
June offered, "I ... I told you, Mother. Last mght, when I went
"Oh, yes. And I told you,June,I didn't like tha!.l didn't like that at
all. We'd better go upstairs. Bobby?" who only grunted.
"Some people said they saw two moons in the sky." He stood up
House of the Ax 129
from his chair. "They named one of them George," and didn't watch
June but the back of Bobby's head; and knew June reacted anyway.
"Two moons in the sky?" Mrs Richards asked. "Now who said they
saW that?"
"Calkins doesn't say," Bobby mumbled.
"The guy who wrote the article didn't see them," he told Mrs
Richards.
"Two moons?" Mrs Richards asked again. ".June, when you came in,
you didn't say anything about-"
June had left the room.
"June! June, we've got to go upstairs I "
"Do I have to come too?" Bobbyasked.
"Yes, you have to!"
Bobby folded the paper loudly.
"Junel" Mrs Richards called again.
He followed mother and boy to the door, where June waited. While
Mrs Richards opened first the upper, then the lower, at last the middle
lock,June's eyes, perfectly round, swept his, implored, and closed.
IIThe:re we are."
All blinking for different reasons, they entered the hall. He followed
til Mrs Richards announced, "Now," and conlinued, "I want youwhat is your name?-to walk up in front."
It was surprisingly easy to say, "Kidd," as he stepped around the
children.
'Pardon?" Mrs Richards asked.
"Kidd. Like Captain Kidd." .
"Like Billy the Kid?" Bobby asked.
·yeah. "
"Neith .. of them were terribly nice people," saidJune.
"The Cisco Kid," Bobby said. Then, with raised eyebrows and small
smile, droll as an adult of thirty: "Pow, pow ... ?"
"Bobby, stop!"
He walked with Mrs Richards, Her heels clunked; his sandal lisped,
his bare foot hardly whispered.
As they reaciled the elevators there was noise above. They looked
at the stairwell door with its wire-webbed glass and EXIT in red letters
across it. lrundling footsteps grew louder-
(His hand pressed against his leg, across one turn of chain.)
louder still, till shadows crossed the glass. The footsteps,
dropping below, softened.
Mrs. Richards' hand, grey as twigs from fife, hung against the wall
130 Dhalgren I, Hause aftheAx 131
by the elevator bell. "Children," she said. "It must be children. They
run up and down the stairs, in the haIl, banging on the walls, the doors.
They don't show thernselves, you knOw. That's because they're afraid."
Her voice, he realized, was hoarse with terror. "They're afraid of us.
They don't have to be. We're not going to hurt them. I just wish they
wouldn't do that. That's all. 1 just wish they wouldn't."
Two separate elevators opened.
From one a man said, "Oh," a little gruffiy. "Honey. It's you. Scared
me to death. Where're you going?"
From the other came a faint wind, from a long way up or a long way
down.
"Arthur! Oh, Arthur, this is Kidd! Edna Brown sent him to help.
We're taking him to see the new apartment."
He shook the large, moist hand.
"Pleased," Arthur Richards said. The closing door k-chunhed his
shoulder, ,etreated, then tried to close again.
"Edna Sent him over to help us with the cleaning and the moving."
"Oh. Edna coming over later?"
"She said she'd try this afternoon, Mr Richards."
K-chunk.
"Good. Hey, let's get in this thing before it knocks me down.· Mr
Richards guffawed. His white collar made folds in his fleshy neck. His
hair was so pale, possible white was lost in the gloom. "Sometimes I
think this thing doesn't like me. Come in."
K-chunk.
They ducked through. The door sealed them into darkness.
"19" hung, orange, on the black.
"Arthur,' Mrs Richards said in the humming dark, "they've been
running in the hall, again. They came and beat on the door. Twice.
Once this morning, and onCe right after Kidd came. Oh, I was sa glad
he was there!"
"That's all right, honey," Mr Richards reassured. "That's why we're
moving."
"Management has just got to do something. You say you have been
down to the office and told them?'
"I've been down. I told them. They said ,they're having difficulty
right through here. You've got to understand that, sweetheart. We're all
having difficulty.·
June beside him. She was the closest person to him in the
elevator.
"You'd know how upsetting it was if you ever heard it, Arthur. I
don't see why you can't take a day off of work. Just so you'd knOw."
"rm sure it's upsetting. n
The door opened; in the han he could see two ceiling globes were
mrking.
Mrs Richards laoked across her husband's chest. "They wouldn't do
it if Arthur was home."
"Where do you work, Mr Richards?" he asked as they got out.
"MSE ... Maitland Systerns Engineering. Honey, I wish I could take
aff from work. But things are even more confused there than they are
here. This just isn't the lime for it. Not now."
Mrs Richards sighed and took out a key. "I know, dear. You're sure
Management said it would be all right?"
"I told you, honey, 1 got the key from them."
"Well, they never answered my letter. They answered in two days
when 1 wrote them last year about the plaster inJune's bedroom." The
key went in with a sound like gravel. "Anyway-" she looked across
Mr Richards' chest again-"this is where we're going to move to."
She strode into the pale blue room through rattling mountains of
brown paper. "The lights," she said. "Try the lights."
Mr Richards and June and Bobby waited in the doorway.
He stepped inside, flicked the switch.
The ceiling light flared, went Pppp!, and out.
June, behind him, let a small cry.
".ha!'s only the bulb. At least you have some power.»
"Oh, we can fix that," Mr Richards said and came inside. ·Come on,
kids. Get inside now."
June and Bobby squeezed through shoulder to shoulder, but remained sentinel at the jambs.
"What else has to go beside this paper?"
"Well." Mrs Richards righted a cane bottom chair. "There're the
othenoorns, furniture and stuff.· Brown paper roared about her shins.
"All sorts of junk. And the dirt. And then of course, we'll have to move
OUr own things up."
Blinds, fanen from one fixture, dangled their crushed aluminum
slats to the floor. "Just take those all down. It'll be a nice apanment
when it's clean."
"Did you know the people who lived here before?"
"No," Mrs Richards said. "No. We didn't know them. Now all you
have to do is clean these out." She walked into the kitchen and opened
132 Dhalgren
a broom closet. "Mop, pail, Spic-n'.span. Everything." She came back.
"There's all sorts of things in the other rooms."
"What were they doing with dl this paper?"
"I dunno," Bobby said uneasily {rom the doorway.
Stepping into the lichenous leaves, his bare foot came down on
wood, wire, glass: hrah! He jerked his foot, kicking away paper.
The break in the cover.glass went through both faces: Framed in
black wood, husband and wife, bearded and cOiffed, posed in Dineteen·
hundreds clothing. He picked it up from the papers. The loose glass
ground.
"What's that?" Mrs Richards asked, stepping around more over·
turned furniture.
"I guess I broke it," trying to feel, without looking, if he had cut his
foot.
BetweeD the parents, in matching sailor suits, a sister and her two
brothers (one younger, one older) looked serious and uncomfortable.
"It was just lying on the floor."
Mrs Richards took it from him. The hanging·wire rattled on card·
board backing. "Isn't that something. Who do you suppose they are?"
"The people who lived here before-'" June stepped up. then
laughed. nOh, it couldn't be. Its so old!"
"Daddy," Bobby said from the doorway.
"Yes?"
"I think Kidd wants to use the bathroom."
June and Mrs Richards both turned.
"I mean," Bobby said, "hes just been living in the park, and stuff;
he's real dirty."
Mrs Richards sucked her teeth and June only just did not say, nOh,
Bobby!"
Mr said, ·Well ... " smiling, and then, "Urn ... " and then,
'Well ..• sure.'
"I am sort of scroungy," he admitted. "I could use a washup, after I
finish work up. here."
"Sure," Mr Richards repeated, heartily. "I've got a razor you can use.
Mary'll give you a towel. Sure."
"In this room-" Mrs Richards had leaned the photograph against
the wall and was trying to open a door now-"l don't know what they
put in this room."
He went ,to take the knob. Something scraped as he shoved the door
in a rew inches. A rew inches more and he could peer: "Furniture,
ma'am. I think the whole room is filled up with furniture."
"Oh, dear ... n
"1 can squeeze in there and get it out. D
"Are you sure .......... r
House of the Ax 133
"Why don't you all just go downstairs? I can get started on this. It's
got to be neat and clean. It's a mess now. Theres not too much you have
to show me. H •
"Well, I suppose . .. H
"Come on, Mary. Let the boy get to work."
He went back to the front room and began to push the paper over
to one side of the room.
"Bobby, oome on back from there. I don't want you getting in trouble."
"Momma ... n
The door closed: ... the boy? Well, he was used to having his age
misjudged. (Where do they want me to put this crap!) He turned
around and, with a sandal, stepped on something else. He kicked back
paper: a kitchen fork.
He put his notebook on the chair Mrs Richards had set right, and
began to fold the wrapping paper to yard-square packets. Out there on
the balcony, he could toss it over. Shit·colored angel flakes? And the
furniture: crash! No, can't do that very well. Drag all that junk to the
elevator, drop a traveling furnished room to the cellar. Punch around
in the basement dark with it? Beating on the wall, thumping on the
floor? Not that either. Put it all On oneside of the room, sweep and scrub,
then all to the other. Burn it in the middle? What does she expect?
At any rate, in ten minutes, hall the floor was clear. On the black
(with white marbling) vinyl, he'd already uncovered a saucer filmed
with dried ooffee; Time with a wrinkled cover he recognized from several years back; some paint·crusted ragsThe knock made him jump.
June caUed, "It's just me . .. "
When he opened the door, she stepped in with a bottle of Coke in
one hand, in the other a plate with a sandwich. The sandwich had a
hole at one side. She thrust them out and said: "Please, don't say any-
.thing about last night, at the bar!. Please! Please?"
"I didn't say anything to your mother." He took plate and bottle. "I
wasn't going to get you in trouble."
"They don't koow anything about that ... ! The paper had the pictures, but they didn't have my name ... though everybody koows it
anyway!"
"All right-"
"They looked at them, Mother and Daddy. They looked at them and
134 Dhalgrrn
they didn't recognjze me! Oh,I thought I was going to die .•. 1 cried.
Mterward. Oh ... " She swallowed. "Mother ... sent that up to you.
She thought you might be hungry. Please don't say anything?"
"I won',t. n and was annoyed.
"It was like you were playing with me. That was awful!"
He took a drink. "Did you fmd him, George Harrison?" It was bub·
bly but tepid.
She whispered, "No ... "
"What did you want him for?"
Her totally vulnerable look made him grin.
He put the plate down on the chair, considering whether to accept
what so resembled the once rejected; then he took the sandwich and
tore through hole with his teeth. Sparn. And mayonnaise. "He was
there. You shouldn't've run off. He {:ame out just a minute later." He
swallowed. "Hey, you want a picture of him?'
"Hu.h?!:! .
"lean get you a picture of him, if you want, not like they had in the
ne.wspaper,»
"No.1 don't want a picture of him. What kind of picture?"
"Big full-color poster. Buck naked."
"No!" She dropped her head. "You are playing with me. I wish you
wouldn't. ItS just awful"
"Hey, I just .• ." He looked from sandwich to bottle. He wasn't hungry, but had eaten in complicity. Now he wished he hadn't. He said: "If
you play by youISeif, you're just going to lose. If I play with you, maybe
you'll ... have a chance, •
Her hair swung; she looked up, with a confusion he paid her the
compliment of assuming feigned.
"Tomorrow I'll get you the-·
"You were supposed to wait for me," Bobby said from the doorway.
"Morn said we were supposed to come up here together ... Gosh, you
almost got this room clean.'
June made shoulder motions which Bobby did not exactly ignore;
neither did he respond. Ins[ead, he said, "You got that stuff aTOund
your neck. Uke [his." He held up his eright wristlet.
"Yeah." He grinned. "Bet you won't tell me where you got yours."
Bobby looked more surprised than he'd expected. "I told Mom and
Daddy that I just found them."
June said, petulantly, "You shouldn't wear them. "
Bobby put his hands behind his back and humphed, as though this
Were an exchange from a frequent argument.
House of the Ax 135
"Why shouldn' [ he?"
Bobby said, "She thinks terrible things happen if you wear [hem.
She's scared. She took hers off."
June glared at him.
"You know what 1 think?" Bobby said. "I think even worse things
happen to people who wear them for a while and then take them am" "r didn' [ take it off."
"Youdid!n.
"I didn't!n
"You did!"
"It wasn't mine! And you shouldn't have said you found it. I bet really bad things happen to people who steal them."
"I didn1t steal it!"
"Youdid!D
"I didn1t!fI
"You did!"
·Oh ... !" In sibling frustration she flung her hands out to end the
antiphon.
He took another bite of pulpy bread; swallowed it with warm Coke:
bad idea. He put both down.
"I'm going back," Bobby said. ·You better come too. We're supposed
,to be together." And marched out the door.
She waited. He watched.
Her hand moved in the side folds of her skirt, started to come up.
Then she raised her head.
"Maybe you better-"
DOh, he's going to go exploring." Contempt?
"Why do you want to find ... George?"
She blinked. A word lost itself in breath. "I ... I have to. I want [a!"
Her hands tried to raise, each one, in turn, holding the other down.
"Do you know him?"
"I've seen him."
For all her light-eyed, ash-blandness, her expression was incredibly
intense. ·You just ... live out there?"
"Yeah.' He examined her face. "So far I haven't needed a ... " Intense, but it told him litde .•... I haven't been here anywhere near as
long as you have." He forced his shoulders down; they'd hunched to
fend something he had not even consciously acknowledged an atlack.
"I hope you find him." It wasn' [ an attack; it was just that intensity.
"But you've got a lot of competition."
"What ... ?" Her reaction to his realizing i[ was to suddenly lose all
136 Dhalgren
ofit. "What do you want?" She sounded exhausted, looked as if she
would repeat it with no voice at all. "Why .•. did you come here?"
"To clean up ... I don't know why. To play, maybe. Why don't you
let me clean up? You better go back downstairs." He picked up another paper and folded it, growling and flapping, to manageable size.
"Oh ... " And suddenly she seemed just a very young girl again.
"You're just ... n She sl}rugged; and left.
He finished the paper, put the revealed junk in tire kitchen, uprighted more furniture, and thought about this family.
They filled his mind whUe he finally shouldered into the packed
room; he reached innumerable deciSions about them which he lost to
scraping chair legs, collapsing bridge tables, drawers that would not fit
in their chiffoniers. One thought, however, remained surfaced for the
time it took to move Live pieces into the swept front room: Trying to
stay sane under that sort of madness drives us nuts. He contemplated
writing it in hiS notebook. But none of the words (and he had laken out
hiS pen) weighed enough to pull hiS hand to the paper. The thought
vaniShed in the gritting hinges of the writing board to a rolltop desk.
Who bad stulIed all thiS junk in here? (Drive? Pressure? Effort? ... but
was exerting too much of it maneuvering a daybed, On its end, around
a hureau.) With slick underarms and gritty neck, he toUed, contemplating hours and wages. But it waS difficult to judge slipping time
while shuffling and arranging so much hollow dialogue.
When he went out on the balcony, the sky was the color of dark
stone. HiS nasal cavity stung. He thought he saw movement down in
the grounds. But when he took the rail, to look over, it was only smoke.
And hiS forearms were sore. He went inside. He ate the rest of the sandwich. He drank the Coke, now flat as well as warm.
Work till sunset in a city where yoa neYer see the sun? He laughed.
Fuck them if they expected him to get all thiS stuff to the basement! He
ambled, panting, through dressers, easy chairs, day beds, and huffets.
The thought occurred to put it in another aparImenl on the same floor.
HiS next thought was: Why not?
He turned, gigantic, in the belly-high furniture fortsl. There was nO
one else, for practical purposes, in the building. Who would know?
Who would care? HiS bladder suddenly warmed.; he started down the
hall.
At the end -of an alcove, a hint of tile over the doorsill identified the
bathroom. I'O$ide, he flipped a light switch: lightS stayed off. But, as he
turned, hiS shin bumped the toilet ring.
House of the Ax 137
It was pitch dark but-he thought, what the hell.
The particular sound of hiS water, reiterated by sudden, hot wetness
against hiS foot, told him he'd miSsed. He varied his aim withput the
rattle of water on water to sing success. Stop his stream? The memory
of the yellow burst of pain at the base of hiS penis ... He'd mop later.
And let it run.
He lurched from the darkness and said, "Shit!»
HiS wet foot left its spreading print on the notebook, where it lay
outside the door. Had it crept after him for soiling? No; he remembered
(black and white; no color ... like some dreams) carrying it with the
intention of writing something down. When the lights hadn't worked,
he had dropped it there.
3
"It's me, Kidd. tt
'Oh, Iiey, just a second.»
The chain fell. The door opened.
Behind her, candles flickered on the phone table. The light from the
living room tossed unsteady shadows on the rug. A doorway up the
hall let out wavering orange. "Come on in."
He followed June to the living room.
"Well.» Mr Richards peered abo"e the Times, folded small. "You
worked on a good bit past sundown I'd say. How's it going?"
"Fine. There was a whole lot of broken glass in the back room. A
vanity turned over. n
"You got the furniture out?" Mrs Richards called from the kitchen.
"Everything's in the front room. I can do all the back floors tomorrow, and get the rest of the stuff out of [here for you. It's not going to
be hard."
"Thats good. Arthur ... ?"
"Oh, yes," Mr Richards said. "Marys put out a towel for you. Go
right in and run yourself a bath. Do you use an electric razor?"
"No."
"I have one, if you want. I put out a safety, for you, anyway. Blades
new: We'd like to invite you to stay for supper."
"Hey," he said. wanting to leave. "That's very nice. Thank you."
"Bobby, you put candles in the bathroom?"
Bobby went Umph (lver hiS book.
"Ufe by candlelight," Mr Richards said. "Its really something, isn't i[?"
138 Dhalgren
"At least the gas isn't off," Mrs Richards called in again. "That's
something too." She stepped to the door. "Bobby. Arthur, both of you!
This isn't enough ligBt to read by; you'll rllin your eyes."
"Bobby. put your book down. You heard your mother. You read too
much anyway."
"Arthur, he can't read too much. It's just his eyes." She went back
into the kitchen.
On top of the bookcase by Mr Richards' chair (neither he nor
Bobby had ceased their reading) between an edition of Paradise Lost
thatsaid "Classics Club" and something thick by Michener, was a volume,
thinner than both, with white letters down a black spine: 'Pilgrimage!
Newboy." He pulled the book loose. The candles flaked light across
the cover. "Did Mrs Brown ever come?" He turned the book over.
From the case, black ceramic lions looked somewhere else and glistened. The back blurb was only three uninformative lines. He looked
at the front again: Pilgrimago by Ernest Newboy.
"She'll be here by the time we .at. She always is." June snickered,
waiting for Father or Mother to object Neither did. "That's by that poet
they told about in the paper. Bobby got it for Mother from the bookstore yesterday.'
He nodded. "Ma'am?' He looked in the kitchen door. "May I look
at this?"
"Certainly," Mrs Richards .said, stirring, at the stove.
He went into the bathroom; probably laid out the same as the one
he'd peed all over upstairs. Two candles on the back of the toilet tank
put two flecks on each tile; and there was another candle up OD the
medicine cabinet.
Ho turned the taps, sat on the toilet lOp, and, with Newboy on his
notebook, read at the "Prolegomena."
The water rushed.
After a page he skipped, reading a line here, a verse paragraph further on. At some he lallghed out loue!.
He put down the book, shucked his clothing, leaned over tbe rim
and lowered his chained, grimy ankle. Steam kissed the sole ofhisfoot,
then hot water licked it.
Sitting in the cooling tub, chain under his buttocks, he had scrubbed
only a minute before the waterwas grey and covered with pale scalings.
Well, lanya had said she wouldn',t mind. .
He let thal.water out, and ran more over his feet, rubbing the gntty skin from his insteps. He'd known he was dirty, but the amount of
fil th in the water was He soaked and soaped his hair, rubbed
House of the Ax 139
Iris arms and chest with the bar till the chain tore it. He ground the
balled washrag beneath his jaw, and then lay back with. his ears under
water, to watch the;sle of his belly shake to his heart beat, each curved
hair a wet scale, like the shingled skin of some amphibian.
Sometime during all this, Madame Brown's high laughter rolled into
the hall; and a little on, her voice outside the door: "Nol No, you can't
go in there, Muriel! Someone's taking a bath."
He let out the water, and lay back, exhausted and clean, occasionally wiping at the tub-line of grit, wider than a garrison belt. He
plessed his back porcelain. Water trapped there poured around
his shoulders. He sat, wondering if one could will oneself dry. And,
slowly. dried.
He looked at his shoulder, peppered with pores, run with tiny lines
he could imagine separated each cell, fuzzed with dark down. He
brushed his mouth on his skin, licked the de-salted flesh, kissed it,
kissed his arm, kissed the paler place where veins pushed across the
bridge from bicep to forearm, realized what he was dOing, with scowling laughter, but kissed himself again. He pushed to standing. Drops
trickled the back ofhis legs. He was dizzy; the tiny flames wobbled in
the tiles. He stepped out. heart knocking to the sudden effort.
He toweled roughly at his hair, gently at his genitals. Then, on his
knees, he did a slightly better job washing away the ha.irs and grit and
flaky stuff on the bathtub bottom.
He picked up his pants, shook his head over them; well, they were
all he had. He put on, combed his moist hair back with his fmgers, tucked in his shirt, buckled on his sandal, and came out into the
hall. Behind his ears was cool, and still wet.
"How many baths did you take?" Mr Richards asked. "Three?"
"Two and a half." Kidd grinned. "Hello, Ma-Mrs Brown."
"They've been telling me how hard you've worked."
Kidd nodded. not that bad. I'll probably finish up tomorrow. Mr
Richards? You said you had a razod"
'Oh yes. You're sure you don't want to use my electric?"
"I'm used to the other kind."
"It's just you'll have to use regular soap."
"Arthur," Mrs Richards called from the kitchen, 'you have that mug
of shaving soap Michael gave you for Christmas."
Mr Richards snapped 'his fingers. "Now I'd forgot. That was three
years back. 1 never did open it. Grew a beard since ,too. I had a pretty
good-looking beard for a while, you know?"
"It looked silly," Mrs Richards said. "r made him shave it off."
HO Dhalgren
Back in the bathroom, he lathered his jaw; then scraped the warm
foam away. His race cooled under the blade. He decided to leave his
sideburns half an inch longer. Now (in two distinct stages) they came
well below his ears.
For a moment, holding a hot washcloth across his face, he contemplated the patterns inside his eyes against the dark. But like everything
in this house, they seemed of calculated inconsequence.
From the kitchen: "Bobby, please come in and set the table. Now!"
Kidd went into the living room. "Bet you'd hardly recognire me,"
he said to Madame Brown.
·Oh, I don't know about that."
"Dinners ready,' Mrs Richards said. "Kidd, you and Bobby sit back
there. Edna, you sit here with June. "
Madame Brown went over and puHed out her chair. "Muriel, stay
down there and be good, hear me?"
He squeezed between the wall and the table-and took some tablecloth with him.
"Oh, dear!" Madame Brown lunged to grab a tottering brass candlestick. (In suddenly bared mabogany, the reHected Dame steadied.) By
candlelight her face had again taken on that bruised-eyed tawdriness
she bad last night in the bar.
"Jesus," Kidd said. "I'm sorry." He pulled the cloth back down acroSS
the table and began to straighten silverware. Mrs Richards had put out
a proCusion oHorks, spoons, aad side plates. He wasn't sure if he got all
of them in the right place or which were his or Bobbys; when he finally
sat, two fingers lingeredoa the ornate handle of a knife; he watched
them rubbing, thick with enlarged knuckles and gnawed nails, but
translucently clean. After baths, he reflected, when you're still alone in
the john, is the time for all those things you don't want people around
for: jerkiag off, picking your
nose and eating it,serious nail biting. Was
it Some misguided sense of good maaners that had kept him from any
of these here? His thoughts drifted to various places he'd indulged such
habits not so privately: seated at the far end oflunch counters, standing
at public urinals, in comparatively empty subway caIS at night, in city
parks at dawn. He smiled; he rubbed.
"Those were my mothers,· Mrs Richards said, on the: other side of
the table. She set down two bowls of soup for Arthur and Madame
Brown, then went back to the kitchen. "I think old silver is lovely-'
her voice came in-"but keeping it polished is awfully dillicult.· She
came out again with two mOre bowls. "1 wonder if it's that-what do
House of the Ax 141
call it? That sulfur dioxide in the air, the stuff eating away all the
paintings and statues in Venice.' She set one in front of Kidd and one
in front of Bobby, who was just squeezing into place-more plates and
silverware slid on the wrinkling cloth; Bobby pulled it straight again.
Kidd took his fingers from the tarnished handle and put his hand
in his lap.
''We've never been to Europe,' Mrs Richards said, returning from the
kitchen with bowls for her and June. "But Arthur's parents went-oh,
years ago. The plates are Arthurs mother's-from Europe:. I SuppOse I
shouldn't use the good ones; but I do whenever we have company.
They're so festive-Oh, don't wait for me. Just dig in .• '
Kidds soup was in a yellow melmac bowl. The china plate beneath
bo,e an intricate design around its fluted lip, crossed by more intricate
scratches that might have: come from cleanser or steel wool.
He looked around to see if he should start, caught both Bobby and
June looking around for the: same purpose; Madame. Brown had a china
bowl but everyone elses was pastel plastic. He wondered if he, or
Madame Brown alone, would have merited the spread.
Mr Richards picked up his spoon, skimmed up some. soup.
So he did too.
With the oversized spoon-bowl still in his mouth, he noticed Bobby,
June, and Madame Brown had all waited for Mrs Richards, who was
only now lifting hers.
From where he. sat, he could see into the kitchen: Other candles
burned on the counter. Beside a paper bag of garbage, its lip neatly
turned down, stood two Open Campbell's cans. He took another
spoonful. Mrs Richards has mixed, he decided, two, or even ,three
kinds; he could recognize no specific flavor.
Under the tablecloth edge, his other hand had moved to his kneethe edge of his little finger scraped the table leg. First with two fingers,
then with three, then with his thumb, then with his fore-knuckle he
, explored the circular lathing, the upper block, the under-rim, the wing
bolts, the joints and rouaded excrescences of glue, the hairline cracks
where piece was joined to piece-and ate more soup.
Over a full spoon, Mr Richards smiled and said, "Where's your family from, Kidd?"
"Ne.wYork-" he bent over his bowl'-"State.· He wondered where
he had learned to recognize this as the milder version of the blunt
What-nationality-are.you? whiCh, here aad there about the country,
could create unpleasantnesses. '
142 Dhalgren
"My people are from Milwaukee," Mrs Richards said. "Arthurs family is aD from right around the BeHona area. Actually my sister lived
down here too-well, she did. She's left noW. And SO has all of Arthurs
family. It's quite strange to think of Mananne andJune--we named our
lune aCter Arthurs mother_and Howald and your Uncle Al not here
anymore. D
"Oh, I don't know," Mr Richards said; Kidd saw him preparing to
ask how long he'd heen here, when Madame Brown asked: "Are you a
student, Kidd?"
"No, ma'am," realizing it was a question whose answer she prohably
knew; but liked her for asking. "I haven't been a student for a while."
"Where were you in school, then?" Mr Richards asked.
"Lots of places. Columbia. And a community college in DelaWare."
"Columhia University?" Mrs Richards asked. "In New York?"
"Only for a year. "
"Did you like it?·l've spent a lot of and I have both
spent a lot of time-thinki ng about whether the children should go
away to school. I'd like for Bobby to go to some place like Columbia.
Though State, right here, is very good."
"Especially the poli.sci department," Kidd said. Mr Richards and
Madame Brown spooned their soup away from them. Mrs Richards,
June, and Bobby spooned theirs toward them. One, he remembered,
was more correct; but not which. He looked at the ornate silverware
handles, diminishing in size either side of his plate, and finaHy simply
sank his spoon straight down in the soup:' center.
"And of.course itl; a lot less expensive." Mrs Richards sat back, with
a constrained laugh. 4Expense is always something you have to think
about. Especially today. Here at State-" (Four more spoonfuls, he fig.
ured, and the soup would be too low for his compromise technique.)
Mrs Riehardssatforward again. "You say, the poli·scidepartment?" She
tipped her soup bowl toward her.
4Thatl; what someone told me: Kiddsaid. "WhereS Jlme going to go?"
Mr Richards tipped his.away. "I don't know whether June has
thought too much about tbat.·
Mrs Richards said: "It would he very nice if June wanted to go to
college."
"June isn't too, what you'd call, wel1, academic. June's sort of my
old·fashioned girl.' Mr Richards, tipping his bowl, apparently couldn't
get 1mough; he picked it up, poureo. the last drops into his spoon, and
selit down. "Aren't you, honey?"
• Arthur, really ... !" Mrs Richards said.
House of the Ax 143
"Irs very good, dear," Mr Richards said. "Very good."
"Yes, ma'am," Kidd said. "It is," and put his spoon on his plate. It
wasn)t.
"I'd like to go to college-" June smiled at her lap-au I could go
someplace like New York."
silly!" Mr Richards made a disparaging gesture with his soup
spoon. "It was all we could do to keep her in high schoo!!"
"It just wasn't very interesting." June's bowl-pink melmaemoved, under her spoon, to the plate'S rim. She centered it again.
"That's all."
"You wouldn't like New York," Mr Richards said. "You're too much
of a sunshine girl. June likes the sun, swimming, outdoor things.
You'd wither away in New York or Los Angeles, with all that smog
and pollutiolL •
"Oh, Daddy!"
"I thinkJune ought to apply to the junior College next term-' Mrs
Richards turned in mid·sentence from husband to daughter-"to get
some idea if you liked it or not. Your marks weren't that bad. I don't
think it would be such a terrible idea to try it ollt, at theJunior Colleg •. "
"Mom!" June looked at her lap, not smiling.
mother went through college," Mr Richards said, "I went
through college. Bobby's going to go. If nothing else, it's a place to get
married in. n
"Bobby reads more than June," Mrs Richards explained. "He reads
all ,the time, in fact. And I sllppose he is more school-minded.'
"ThatJunior College is an awful place,· June said. "I hate everybody
who goes there .•
"Dear," Mrs Richards said, "you don't know everybody who goes
there."
Kidd, with his middle finger, was exploring the countersinking
about some flathead screw, when Madame Brown said:
"Mary. how close are we to the second course? Arthur up there looks
like he's about to eat the bottom of his bowl.'
'Oh, dear me!" Mrs Richards pushed back in her chair. "I don't
know what I'm thinking of. I'll be right in-"
"You want any help, mom?" June said.
"No." Mrs Richards disappeared into the kitchen. "Thank you,
eJarling."
"Pass me your soup plates, everybody," June said.
Kidd's hand came up from under the tablecloth to join his other on
the china plate to pass it-but stopped just below the table lip. Knuck·
144 Dhalgren
les, fingertips, and two streaks on the back of the hand were smudged
black.
He put his hand down between his legs and looked around.
Anyway, people were keeping their plates and just passing their
bowls. He passed his with one hand, his other between his knees. Then
the other joined it and he tried, without looking, to rub his fingers
clean.
Mrs Richards came in with twa steaming ceramic bowls. "I'm afraid
we're vegetarian tonight." She went out, returned with twa more. "But
there's nowhere to get any meat that you can trust," and returned again.
"You do that nice tuna fIsh casserole," MT Richards called aftet her.
"That's very good."
"Ugh," Bobby said.
"Bobby!» June said.
"Yes, I know, Arthur." Mrs Richards returned with a gravy boat, set
it on the table, and sat. "But 1 just feel so funny about fIsh. Wasn't it a
couple of years back alii those people died from some canned tuna that
had gone bad? I just feel safer with vegetables. Though Lord knows,
they can go bad too.'
"Botulism," Bobby said.
"Redly, Bobby!" Madame Brown laughed, a hand against her
sparkling chaios.
"Oh, I don't think we're doing so badly. Mashed potatoes, mush.
rooms, carrots-" Mrs Richards indicated one and another of the
bowls-"and some canned eggplant stuff I've neVer tried before. When
I went to that health.food reStaurant withJulia-when we Were in Los
Angeles?-she said they always use mushrooms and eggplants in place
of meat. And I've made a sauce.· She turned to her husband, as though
to remind him ohomething .• Arthur ... ?"
"What?" Then Mr Richards too seemed to remember. 'Oh, yes ...
Kidd? Well, weve taken up this little habit of having a glass of wine
our meals." He reached down beside his chair, brought up a bot·
de, and set it beside the cancRe at his end of the table. "If it it isn't
something thatappe"ls to you, you're perfectly welcome to have
water""",-n
"I like wine," Kidd said.
Mrs Richards and Madame Brown had already passed their wine
glasses up. So Kidd did too; though the water glass at the head of his
knife seemed the better size for wine drinking as he was accustomed
to it.
House of the Ax 145
Mr Richards peeled away gold foil, pulled loose the plastic stopper,
poured, passed back ,the glasses.
Kidd Sipped; it was alraost black in candlelight. At first he thought
his mouth was burning-the wine was bubbly as soda pop.
·Sparkling burgundy!" Mr Richards grinned and bobbed his glass.
"We haven't tried ,this one before. 1975. I wonder if that's a good year
for sparkling Burguudy?" He Sipped. "Tastes okay to me. Cheers."
The candle flame staggered, stilled. Above and below the ornate
label, green glass flickered.
"I put a little wine in the gravy," Mrs Richards said. "In the sauce, I
mean-it was left over from last nighes botde. I like to cook with wine.
And soy sauce. When we went to Los Angeles two years ago for
Anhur's conferences, we stayed with the Harringtons. Michael gave
Arthur that shaving soap. Julia Harrington-shes the one who took
me to that Health food restaurant-made absolutely everything with
soy sauce! It was very interesting. Oh, thank you, Arthur."
Mr Rkha,rds had helped himself to mashed potatoes and now
passed the dish. So had Madame Brown.
Kidd checked his fmgers.
The rubbing had not removed any dirt; but it had divided it fairly
evenly between both hands; the rough strips of nail back on the wide
crOwns were once more darkly ringed, as though outlined, nub and
cuticle, with pen. He Sighed, served himself when the dishes passed
him, passed ,them on, and ate. His free hand back beneath the tablecloth, fouud the table leg, again explored.
"If you're not a student," Madame Brown asked, "what do you put
down in your notebook?-none of us could help noticing it.·
It was inside, on Ihe table by the chair; he could see it beyond her
elbow. "I just write things down.·
Mrs Richards hung her hands by the fingertips on the table' edge.
·You write! You're going to be a writer? Do you write poetry?"
·Yeah." He smiled because he was nervous.
"You1re a poet!"
MT Richards, June, and Bobby all sat back aud looked. Mrs Richards
leaned forward and beamed. Madame Brown reached down with some
silent remonstrance to Muriel.
"He's a poet! Arthur, give him some more wine. Look, he's fInished
his glass already. Go on, dear. He's a poet! I think that's wonderful. I
should have known when you took that Newboy book."
Arthur took Kidd's glass, refilled it. "I don't know too much about
146 Dhalgren
poelry." He handed it hack with a smile that, on a college football player, would have purveyed sheepish good will. "I mean, I'm an engineer
..• " As he took his hand away, wine splashed on the cloth.
Kidd said, "Oh, hey, 1-"
"Don't worry about that!" Mrs Richards cried, waving her handwhich knocked against her own glass. Wine splashed the rim, ran
down ,the stem, blotched the linen. While he wondered if such a thing
Were done on purpose to put strangers at ease (thinking: What an uncomfortably paranoid thought), she asked: "What dO you think of him?
Newboy, I meau."
"I don't know." Kidd moved, his glass aside: Through the base, he
could see the diametric mold line across the fool. "I only met him
At the third second of silence, he looked up, and decided he'd said
something wrong. He hunted for the proper apology: but, like a tangle
of string with a lost end, action seemed all loop and no beginning.
"You know Ernest Newboy? Oh, Edna, Kidd's a real poet! And he's
helping us, Arthur! I mean, move furniture and things." She looked
from Mr Richards to Madame Brown, to Kidd. "TeR me-' She spilled
more wine-"is Newboy's work just-wonderful? I'm sure it is. I
haven't had a chance to read it yet. I just got the book yesterday. I sent
Bobby down to get it, because of that article in the TImes. We have this
very nice little book-and-gift shop down the street. They have just
everything like that-But after the articl6, I was afraid they were going
to be all out. I think it's very impor,tant to keep up with current books,
even if it's just bestsellers. And I'm redly interested in poetry. I really
am. Arthur doesn't believe me. But I do-I really do like it."
"That's just because you went to that colfee shop with Julia in Los
Angeles where they were reading that poetry and playing that music."
«And I ,told you, Arthur, the evening we came back, though I don't
pretend I understood it aU, I liked it very much! It was one of the
most-" she frowned, hunting for the right description-"exciting
things I've ... well, ever heard."
"I don't know him very well," Kidd said, and ate more mushrooms;
that and the eggplant weren't bad. The mashed POtatoes (instant) were
pretty gluey, though. "I just met him ... once.·
"I'd love to meet him," Mrs Richards said. "I've never known a real
writer.11
"Mike Harrington wrote a book," Mr Richards objected. "A very
good book, too.".
House of the Ax 147
"Oh, Arthur, that was an instruction manual . .. on stresses and
strains and the uses of a new metal!"
"It was a very good instruction manual." Mr Richards poured more
wine for Madame Brown and himself.
"Can I have some?" Bobby said.
"No," Mr Richards said.
"How long have you been writing poetry?" Madame Brown was
waiting with a forkful of well-sauced eggplant,lune with one of carrots;
Mrs Richards had a very small fluff of potato on the tine tips of her
fork-when it struck him that he didn't know. Which seemed absurd,
so he frowned. "Not very ... " long, he'd started to say. He had a clear
memory of writing the first poem in the notebook, seated against the
lamppost on Brisbain Avenue. But had he ever written any poems before? Or was it something he'd wanted to do but never gotten around
to? He could see not rememberiog doing something. But how could you
not remember not doing something? " ... for very long," he said fmally.
"Just a few days, I guess," and frowned again, because that sounded
siHy. But he had no more surety of its truth or falsity than he had of
his name. "No, not very long at all." He decided that Was what he
would say from now on to anyone who asked; but the decision simply
confirmed how uncertain he was of its truth.
"WeB, I'm sure-" there was only one more fluff of mashed potatoes on Mrs Richard's plate-"they must be very good." She ate it. "Did
Mr Newboy like them?"
"I didn't show them to him." Somehow silverware, glasses, sideplates, and candles didn't seem right for talking about scorpions, orchid fights, the invisible Calkins and the belligerent Fenster-
"Oh, you should," Mrs Richards said. "The younger men in Arthur's
oJIice are alway.s bringing him their new ideas. And he say.s they've been
coming up with some looloos lately-didn't you, Arthur? Arthurs always happy to talk to the younger men about their new ideas. I'm sure
MrNewboywould be happy to talk to you, don't you think, Arthur?"
"WeH," Mr Richards reiterated, "I don't know too much about poetry."
"I'd certainly like to see some of what you've written," Madame
Brown said and moved Mrs Richards' wine glass away from her straying .hand. "Maybe some day you'U show us. Tell me, Arthur-"
Madame Brown looked over joined flngers-"what is going on at Maitland, now? With everything in the state its in, I'm amazed when I hear
of anything gelling done.»
148 Dha/gren
Shel; changing the subject! Kidd thought with relief. And decided
he liked her.
"Engineering." Mr Richards shook his head, looked at Mrs
Richards-"Poetry ... " changing it, rather bluntly, back. "They don't
have too much to do with one another."
Kidd decided to give it a try himself. "I met an engineer here, Mr
Richards. His name was LouCer. He was working on ... yeah, converting a plant. It used to make peanut butter. Now it makes vitamins."
"Most people who like poetry and art and stuff," Mr Richards adhered, "aren't very interested in engineering-' Then he frowned.
".he vitamin plant? That must be the one down at Helmsford."
Kidd sat back and saw that Madame Brown did too.
Mrs Richards' hands still spasmedon the table.
Mr Richards asked: "What did you say his name was?"
"Loufer."
"Don't ,think I know him." Mr Richards screwed up his face and
dropped his chin over the smooth gold-and-mustard koot of his tie.
"Of cOurse I'm in Systems. Hel; probably in Industrial. Two completely different fields. Two completely different professions, really. It's hard
enough to keep up with whats going on in your own field, what your
own people are doing. Some ·of the ideas our men do come up withthey're 100100s all right. Like Mary says. Sometimes I don't even un.-
derstand them-I mean, even when you understand how they work,
you don't really koow what they're for. Right now I'm just back and
forth between the office and the warehouse-lord only koows what
I'm supposed to be doing."
"Just keeping up," Madame Brown said, and leaned one elbow on
the table. As she moved, the candle flame drifted back and forth across
her leEt eye. "At the hospital, it was all I could do to read two or three
psychology bulletins a week, what with the behaviorists and the
gestaltists-"
"Peaches?" said Mrs Richards, leaning forward, kouckles like two
tiny mountain ranges on the table edge. "Would anyone like some
peaches? For dessert?"
Maybe, Kidd thought, she really did want to talk about poetrywhich would be fine, he decided, if he could think of anything to say.
His own plate was empty of everything except the sauce-and-mashedpotato swamp.
"Sure,D
He watched the word hang over the table, silence on both sides.
"[ don't want any!" Bobby's chair scraped.
Both candlesticks veered.
House of the Ax 149
"Bobby-!" Mrs Richards exclaimed, while June caught one and Mr
ruchards caught the other.
Bobby was off into the living room. Muriel barked and ran after him.
"I'll have some, dear." Mr Richards sat back down. "Let him go,
Mary. Hes all right.".
"Muriel? Muriel!" Madame Brown turned back to the table and
sighed. "Peaches sound lovely. Yes, I'll have some."
"Yes, please, Mother," June said. Her shoulders were rather hunched
and she was still looking at her lap, as though consideriog something
intensely.
Mrs Ricbards, blinking after her son, rose and went in the kitchen.
"If I went to school," June blurted, looking up suddenly, "I'd go into
psychology-like you!"
Madame Brown, slightly flattered, Slightly mocking, turned to june
with raised brows. Mocking? Or, Kidd wondered, was it simply surpriSe.
"I'd like to work with ... mentally disturbed children-like you!"
June's fingertips were over the table edge too, but tightly together, and
even, so that you'd have to count to find where right fingertips ended
and left began.
"In my job, dear, at the hospital-" Madame B,own lifted her glass
to sip; as she bent forward, loops of optic chain swung out like a glitteriog bib, and back-or have more to do with the disturbed parents."
June, now embarrassed by her outburst, was collecting plates. "I'd
like to .•• to help people; like a nurse or a doctor. Or like you do-"
Kidd passed his over; it was the last-"with problems in their mind."
He dragged his hands back across the cloth (spotted with sauce,
soup, pieces of carrot, the purple wine blot) and let them fall into his
lap.
Mrs Richards' place was nearly as messy as his own.
"I koow it's a cliche-.· Madame Brown shook her head- "but it
really is true. The parents need the help far more than ,the children.
Really: they bring their totally demolished child to us. And you know
what they want in the first interview? It's always lhe same: they want
us to say, 'What you should do is beat him.' They come in with some
poor nin ... year-old they've reduced.ro a state of numb, inarticulate terror; the child can't dress itself, can't talk above a whisper, and then
only in some invented language; it soils its clothing, and the only co-
150 Dhalgrnn
herent actions it can make are -occasional attempts at murder or, more
frequently, suicide. If I said to them, 'Beat her! Hit him!' they would
glow-glow with delight. When they discover We want (0 take the children away from them, they're indignant! Under.all the frustration and
apparent concern, what they actually come hoping is that we will say,
'Yes, you're handling it all marvelously well. Just be a little firmer!' The
reason l'msuccessfulat my job at all-" Madame Brown touched June's
shoulder and leaned confidently-"as aliI really do is pry the children
loose from their parents-is because what I'm saying. underneath all
my pleasant talk about how much better it would be for the rest of the
family if they let little Jimmy or Alice come to us, is: Wouldn't it be
ever so much more fun to work on ant of your other children for a
while? Wouldn't it be ever so much more interesting to fight someone
with a little more strength left than ,this poor half-corpse you've just
brought in. Why not clear the field and start in on litlie sister Sue or
big brother Bill? Or. maybe each other. Try to get an only child away
from its parents once they've driven it practially autistic1" Madame
Brown shook her head. "It's very depressing. I really think, sometimes,
I'd like to change my field-do iRdividlfal therapy. That's what I've always been interested in, anyway. And since there's nobody at the hospital now anyway-"
"But don't you need licenses, or special examinations to do that,
Edna?" Mrs Richards asked from the kitchen. "I mean, I know it:<; your
profession, but isn't fiddling with people's minds dangerous? If you
don't know what you're doing?" She came in with two long-stemmed
dessert dishes, gave one to Madame Brown, and one to Mr Richards.
"I .. ad an article-' She paused with her hands on the back of her
chair-"about those encounter group things, I think they call them?
Julia Harrington was going to one of those, two years ago. And the
minute I read that article, I cut it out and sent it to her-it was just
terrifying! About all those unskilled people leading them and how they
were driving everybody Touching each other all over, and picking each other up in the air, and telling each other about everything!
Well, some people just couldn't take it a"d got very Seriously iU!"
"Well 1-" Madame Brown began some polite protest..
"I think it's all poppycock,· Mr Richards said. ·Sure, people have
problems. And they should be put away where they can get kelp. But
if you're just indulging yourself, somebody telling you to straighten up
and fly right may be what you need. A rew hard knocks never hurt anybody, and who's in a better position to give out a rew than your own
parents, I say-though I've never lifted a hand to my own." Mr
Hous. of the Ax 151
Richards lifted his hand, palm out, to his shoulder. "Have I, Mary? At
least not since they were big.'
"You're a very good father, Arthur." Mrs Richards came back from
the kitchen with three more dessert glasses clutched together before
her. "No one would ever deny that.·
"Y<lU kids just be glad your parents are as sane as they are.' Mr
Richards nodded once toward Bobby:' (empty) chair and once toward
june's; she was just sitting down in it after taking the plates into the
kitchen. She put a cut glass bowl, filled with white, on the white cloth.
"Here you are," Mrs Richards said, passing Kidd his fruit.
In its long-stemmed dessert dish, the yellow hemisphere just cleared
the syrup.
Kidd looked at it, his face slack, rea!ired his lips were hanging a litllIe open, so closed them.
Beneath the table, he clutched the table-leg so light a band of pain
finally snapped along his forearm. He let go, let out his breath, and
said: "Thank you ... "
not terribly exciting,· Mrs Richards said. "But fruit has lots of
vitamins and things. I made some whipped cream-dessert tapping,
actuall), I do like real cream, but this was.ali we could get. I wanted to
flavor it almond. I thought that would be uice. With peaches. But I was
out of almond extract. Or vanilla. So I used maple. Arthur, would you
like some? Edna?"
"Lord, no!' Madame Brown waved the proffered bowl away. "I'm
heavy enough as it is."
"Kidd, will you?"
The bowl came toward him between the candles, facets glittering.
He blinked, worked his jaw slowly inside the mask of skin, intent on
constructing a smile.
He spooned up a white mound-with th .. flame behind it, its edges
were pale green. •
Madame Brown was watching him; he blinked. Her expression shifted To a smile? He wondered what his own was. It was supposed to be
a smile too; it didn'tfetllike one ...
He buried his peach.
White spHaled into the syrup.
"You know what I think would be lovely?" Mrs Richards said. "If
Kidd read us one of his poems.'
He put half his peach in his mouth and said, "No," swallowed it, and
added, "thanks. I don't really reel like it· He was tired.
June said, "Kidd, you're eating with the whipped cream spoon.'
152 Dhalgren
Hesaid: "Oh. ... "
Mrs Richards said, "Oh, thats all right. Everybody's had some who
wants some."
'1 haven'to" Mr Richards said.
Kidd looked at his dish (. half a peach, splayed open in syrup and
cream), looked at his spoon (the damasking went up the spoon itself,
streaked with cream), at the bowl (above the faceted edges, gouges had
been cut into the heaped White).
"No, thats aU right,· Mr Richards said. Glittering, the bowl moved
alI beyond the candle flames. "I'll just use my spoon here. Everybody
makes mistakes, Bobby does that all the time."
Kidd went back to his peach. He'd gotten whipped cream on his
knuckles. And twO fingers were sticky with syrup. His skin was still
wrinkled from the bath. The gnawed and sucked callous looked like
he imagined leprosy might.
Arthur Richards said something.
Madame Brown answered something back.
Bohby ran through the roam; Mrs Richards yelled at him.
Arthur Richards said something else.
Cream, spreading through the puddle in. the bottom of his dish,
finally met glass all the way around. "I think I'm going to have'to go
soon. " He looked up.
The gold knot ofMr RichardS lie was three inches lower on his shirt.
Had he loosened it when Kidd was not looking? Or did he just not
remember? "I have to meet somebody before it gets too late. And thea
... " He shrugged: "I want to get back here to work early tomorrow
morning. :n
"Is it that late?" Mrs Richards looked disappointed. 'Well, 1 guess
you need a good nights sleep after all that furniture-moving."
Madame Brown put her linen napkin on the table. (Kidd realized he
had never put his in his lap; it lay neatly, by the side of his stained and
spotted place, a single drop of purple near the monogrammed R.) "I'm
feeling a little tired myself. Kidd, if you could wait a minute, 1 wish
you'd walk with me and Muriells there colIee, Mary?"
"Oh, dear ... I didn't put any up."
"Then we might as well go nOw. Kidd is arodous. And I certainly
don't want to be out on the streets any later than I have to.'
Downstairs, somebody laughed; the laughter of others joined it, till.
suddenly there was a series of thumps, like large furniture toppling,
bureau, after bedstead, after chiffonier,
House of the Ax 153
Kidd got up from the table-held the cloth in place this time. His
arm still hurt, "Mr Richards, were you going to pay me now; or when I
anished the whole job?" Getting that out, he was suddenly exhausted.
Mr Richards leaned back in his chair. His fists were in his suit coat
pockets; the front chair legs lifted. "I Imagine you could use a little
right now," One hand came out and up. A bill was folded in it; he'd
been anticipating the request. "Here you go,"
"I worked about three and a half hours, 1 guess, Maybe four. But you
can call it three if you want, since I was just geting started." He took
the dark rectangle; it was a single five-dollar bill, folded in four.
Kidd looked at Mr Richards questioningly, then at Madame Brown,
who was leaning over her chair, snapping her fingers for Muriel.
Mr Richards, both hands back in his pOCkets, smiled and rocked.
Kidd felt there was something else to say, but it was too difficult to
think of what. 'Um ... thank you." He put the money in his pantS
pocket, looked around the table for June; but she had left the room.
"Good night, Mrs Richards." He wandered across green carpet to the
door.
Behind him, as he clicked over lock after lock-there were so
many--Madame Brown was saying: "Good night, Arthur. Mary, thanks
for the dinner. June ... ? June ... ?" she called now-"I'm on my way,
dear. See you soon. Good night, Bobby-Oh, he's back in his room.
With that book I bet, if I know Bobby. Muriel, come along, sweetheart.
Right with you, Kidd. Good night again."
The smoke was so thick he wondered if the glass were opaque and he
only misremembered it as clear-
"Well-" Madame Brown pushed open the cracked door-"what do
you think -of the Richards after your first day on the job?" "r don't think anything." Kidd stretched in the over-thick night.
qrrn just an observer. II
"I lake that to mean you've thought a great deal but find it difficult,
or unnecessary, to articulate." Muriel clicked away down the cement
walk. "They are perplexing."
"I wish,· Kidd said, "he'd paid me for the whole day. Of course, if
they're feeding me and stulf-" another highrtse loomed before tltem.
tier on tier of dark windows-"five dollars hour is a lot." Smoke
crawled across the facade. He had thought about them, of course; he
remembered all his mulling while he Walked in the upstairs apartment.
154 Dhalgren
And-again she was right-he'd certainly reached no synopsizable
conclusion.
Madame Brown, hands behind her back, looked at the pavement,
walked slowly.
Kidd, notebook before him in both hands (He'd almost forgotten it;
Madame Brown had brought it to him I1t thedoor),looked up and could
make out practically nothing. "You're still working in that hospitan"
I'pardon me?11
"That menllll hospital, lOU were talking about." Walking revived
him some, "With the children. Do you still go there every day?"
"No."
When she said nothing more, he said:
"1 was in a mental hospital. For a year. I was just wondering what
happened with-" he looked around at building faces whose wreckage
was hidden behind night and smoke; he could smell smoke here-
"with yours. n
"You probably don't waRt to know," she said, walking a few more
steps in silence. «Especially if you were in one. It wasn't pleasant."
Muriel spiraled hack and away. "You see, 1 was with the hospital's Social
Service Department-you must have gathered that. Lord,l got twentytwo phone calls at home in two hours about evacuation proceduresthe phone went dead in the middle of the last one. Finally, we just decided, even though it was the middle of the night, we'd better go to the
hospital ourselves-my friend and I; you see, 1 had a little friend staying with me at the time. When we got there-walking, mind you-it
was just incredible I You don't expect doctors around at midnight in a
place as understaffed as that. But there was not one orderly, one night
nurse, one guard around! They'd just gone, like that!' She flung up her
hand, in stark dismissal. 'Patients were all up in the open night wards.
We let Qut everybody we could. Thank God my friend found the keys
to that incredible basement wing they first shut down fifteen years ago,
and have been opening up and shutting down regularly-with not a
bit ·of repftirl--every three years since. You could see the fires out the
windows. Some of the patients wouldn't leave. Some of them couldn'tdozens were logy in their beds with mediCation. Others were shrieking in the ha)ls. And if .. I those phone calls about evacuation did anything besides scare off whatever staff was around, I'm sure I didn't see
it! Some rooms we just couldn't find keys to! I broke windows with
chairs. My friend got a crowbar, and three of the patients helped us
House of the Ax 155
break in some of the doors-Oh, yes: Did I mention somebody tried to
strangle me? He just Came up in his pajamas, while I was hurrying
down the second floor corridor, grabbed me, and started choking. Oh,
not very seriously, and only for about two or three minutes, before
some other patients helped me get him off-apparently, as I discovered,
it takes quite a bit of effort to really choke somebody to death who
doesn't want to be choked. And, believe me, 1 didn't. But it was a doozer. I was recovering from that in the 5.5. olIice, when she came in with
these." He heard Madame Brown fmger the chains around her neck: it
was too dark to see glitter. "My friend. She said she'd found them,
wound them around my neck. You could see them flashing in flickers
coming from outside, around the window shades." Madame Brown
paused. "But 1 lold you about that ... ?" She Sighed. "I also told you
that was when she left ... my friend. Some of the rooms, you see, we
just couldn't get into. We tried-me, the olher patients, we tried! And
the patients on the inside, trying just as hard! Christ, we tried! But by
then, fire had broken out in the building itself. The smoke was So thick
you could hardly-" She took a sudden breath. Did she shrug? ·We
had to leave. And, as 1 said, by that time, my little friend had left already."
He could see Madame Brown beside him nOw.
She walked, contemplating either the past Or the pavement.
Muriel wove ahead, barked, turned, ran.
"} Went back once, n she said at last. "The next morning. I don1 t want
10 go again. 1 want to do something else ... I'm a trained psycholOgist.
Social service was never really my fane. I don't know if the patients
who got out were finally evacuated or not. 1 assume they were; but 1
can't be sure." She gave a little humph, 'Perhaps that has something to
do with why I don't leave myself."
"I don'uhinkso," Kidd said, after a moment. "It sounds like youand your friend-were very brave."
Madame Brown humphed again.
"Its just-" he felt uncomfortable, but it was a difIerent discomfort
,than at the table-"you made it sound, when you were talking about
it at dinner, like you still worked there. That'S why I asked."
'Oh, I was just making conversation. Th keep Mary entertained.
When people take the trouble to bring out the best in her, she's quite
a handsome woman; with quite a handsome soul-even if the quotidian surface sits on it a bit askew. I imagine some people find that
hard to see."
156 Dhalgrrn
"Yeah." He nodded. "I guess so." Hali a block ahead, Muriel was a
shifting dollop of darkness. "lthought-" on the curb, he scraped his
heel-"Hey. watch ... !" He staggered. "Um. I thought you said they
had three children.'
."Theydo."
They crossed the damp street. On cool pavement, his heel stung.
"Edward, the oldest, isn't with them now. But it isn't a subject I'd
bring up. Especially with Mary. It was very paimul for her.·
·Oh.· He nodded again.
They stepped up another curb.
"If nothing's functioning around her"," Kidd asked, "why does Mr
Richards go in to work every day?"
"Oh, just to make a showing. Probably for Mary. You've seen how
keen she. is on appearances. U
"She wants him to stay home," Kidd said. "She's scared to death!-
I was pretty scared IpO."
Madame Brown considered a rew moments. "Maybe he does it just
to gel away." She shrugged-it was light enough to see it now. "Perhaps he just goes off and sits on a bench somewhere.'
"You mean . .. hes scared?"
Madame Brown laughed. "Why wouldn't he be?" Muriel ran up, ran
off. "But I think it's much more. likely he simply doesn't appreciate her.
That isn' t fair of me, I know; but then, itl; one of those universal truths
about husbands and wives you really don't have to be fair with. He
loves her, in his way." Muriel ran up again, leapt to Madame Brown's
hip. She roughed the beast's head. Satisfied, it ran off again. "No, he
must be going somewhere! Probably just where he says he. is. To the office ... the warehouse ... " She laughed. "And we've Simply got far too
poetic an imagination! n
"I wasn't imagiuing anythiug." But he smiled. "I just asked." In the
light from a flickering window, a story above them, he saw, through
faint smoke, she was smiling too.
Ahead, Murlel barked.
And what have I invested in interpretiug disfocus for chaos? This
threat: the only lesson is to wait. I crouch in ,the smoggy terminus.
The streets lose edges, the rims of thought Rake. What have I set myself to fix in this dirty notebook that is not mine? Does the revelation
that, though it cannot be done with words, it might be accomplished
insome lingual gap, give me. the right, in injury. walking with a woman
and her dog, to pain? Rather the long doubts: that this labor tears up
House of the Ax 157
the mind's moorings; that, though life may be important in the scheme,
awareness is an imperfect tool with which to face it. To reflect is to fight
away the sheets of silver, the carbonated distractions, the feeling that,
somehow, a thumb is pressed on the right eye. This exhaustion melts
what binds, releases what flows .
Madame Brown opened the bar door for him.
Kidd passed by vinyl Teddy, the bill in his fist. But while he contemplated offering her a drink, someone Came screaming acrosS the
bar; Madame Brown screamed back; they slllggered away. He sat down
at the counters end. The people whose backs he had seen along the
stools, as he leaned forward, gained faces. But no Tak; nor any Lanya.
He was looking at ,the empty cage when the bartender, rolled sleeves
tying off the necks of tattooed leopa.ds, said, "You're a beer drinker,
ain1tyou?"
·Yeah. " He nodded, surprised.
The bottle clacked the scarred counter board. "Come on, come on!
Put it away, kid."
"Oh." Wonderingly, he returned the money to his pocket. "Thanks."
Under a haystack mustache, the bartender sucked his teeth. "What
do you think this place is, anyway?" He shook his head, and walked alI.
His hand had wandered to his sh>rt pocket to click the pen. He
frowned down, paused above some internal turning: he opened the
notebook, held his pen in the air, plunged.
Had he ever done this before? he wondered. With pen to paper and
the actual process occurring, it was as though he had never done anything else. But pause, even moments, and it was as if not only had he
never done it, but there was no way to be sure that he ever would again.
His mind dove for a vision of perfected anger while his hand crabbed
and crossed and rearranged the vision's spillage. Her eyes struck a
dozen words: he chose one in the most relevant tension to the one before. Her despair struck a dozen more; he grubbed among them, teeth
clamped against what cleared. And cleared. So gazed at the cage again
till the fearful distractions fell, ,then turned to her. An obtuse time later,
he raised his hand, swallowed, and withdrew.
He jabbed the pen back in his pocket. His hand dropped, dead and
ugly on the paper. His tongue worked in the back of his mouth while
he waited for energy with which to copy. Sounds resolved from the
noise. He blinked, and saw the pyramided bottles against the velvet
backing. Between his fingers he watched the curling inkline peeled off
from meaning. He reached for the beer, drank a long time, put down
158 Dhalgnm
the bottle. and leI his hand drop on the paper again. But his hand was
wet .. .
He took a breath, turned to look lek
"Eb. ... hello, mete," from his right.
He turned right.
"1 thought it might be you when 1 was on the other side of the bar."
Blue serge; narrow lapels; hair the color of white pepper. "I really am
glad to see you again, to know you're all right. I can't tell you how
upset that whole experience left me. Though that must be a bit presumptuous: You were the one who was hurt. It's been a long time since
I've had to move through such suspicion, such restraint." The face was
that of a thin, aged child, momentarily sedate. "I'd like to buy you a
drink, but I was told that tb.ey don't sell the drink here. Bartender?"
Walking his fists on the wood, the bartender came, like some blond
gOrilla.
,"Can you put together a tequila sunrise?"
"Make my life easy and have a beer,"
"Gin and toniC?D
The bartender nodded deeply.
"And another for my friend aere."
The gorilla responded, forefinger to foreaead,
"Hey; I'm sort of surprised," Kidd volunteered into the feeling onoss
between them, "to see you in here, Mr Newboy.11
"Are you?" Newboy Sighed. "I'm out on my own, tOnight. I've a
whole list of places people have told me I must see while I'm in town.
a bit strange. I gather you know who I ... ?"
"From the Times. n
"Yes." Ne.wboy nodded. "I've never been on the front page of a
ne.wspaper before. I've had just enough of that till now to be rather
protective of my anonymity. Well, Mr Calkins thought he was doing
something nice; his motives Were the best."
"Bellona's a very hard place to get lost in." What Kidd took for slight
nervousness, he reacted to with warmth, "I'm glad I read you were
here."
Newboy raised his peppered brows.
"rVe read SOme of your poem. now; see?"
"And you wouldn't have if you hadn't read about me?"
"I didn't buy me book. A lady had it."
"Which book?"
"Pilgrimage."
House of the Ax 159
Now Newboy lowered them. "You haven't read it carefully, several
times, all the way through?"
He shook his b.ead, felt his lips shake, so dosed his mouth.
"Good." Newboy smiled. "Tb.en you don't know me any better than
I know you. For a moment I thought you had an advantage."
"I only browsed in it" He added: "In the bathroom."
Newboy laugb.ed out loud, and drank. "Tell me about yourself. Are
you a student? Or do you write?"
"Yes. I mean 1 write. I'm ... a poet. Too.'" That was an interesting
thing to say; he decided. It felt quite good. He wondered what Newboy's
reaction would be.
"Very good." Whatever Newboy's reaction, surprise was not part of
it. "Do you find Bellona stimulating, making you produce lots of
work?"
He nodded. "But I've never published anything."
"Did I ask if you had?"
Kidd looked for severity; what I.e Saw was a gentle smile.
"Or are you interested in getting published?"
"Yeah." He turned half around on his stool. "How do you get poems
published?"
"If I couId really answer tb.at, I would probably write a lot more
poems than I do."
"But you don't have any problems now, about getting things in magazines and things?"
"JUSt about everything I write now-" Newboy folded his glass in
both hands-"I can be sure will be publisb.ed. It makes me very careful of what I actually put down. How careful are you?"
The firSt beer bottle was empty. "1 don't knOw." He drank from the
second. "I haven't been a poet very long," he confessed, smiling. "Only
a couple of days. Why'd you come here?"
"What?" There was a little surprise there; but not much.
"I bet you know lots of writers, famous ones. And people in tb.e
government too. Wb.y did you come here?"
"Oh, Bellona bas developed ... an underground reputation, you call
it? One never reads about it, but one hears. There are some cities one
must be just dying to visit." In a theatrical whisper: "I hope this isn't
one of them." While he laugbed, his eyes asked forgiveness.
Kidd forgave and laughed.
"I really don't know. It was a spur of the moment thing," Newboy
went on. "I don't know how I <lid it. I certainly wasn't expecting to
160 Dhalgren
meet anyone like Roger. That headline was a bit of" surprise. But Bellona is full of surprises."
"You're gomg to write about it here?"
Newboy turned his drink. "No. I don't think so." He smiled again.
"You're all safe. "
"You do know a lot of famous people though, I bet. Even when you
read introductions and flyleaves and book reviews, you begin to figure
out that everybody knows everybody. You get this picture of all these
people sitting around together and getting mad, or friendly, probably
screwing each other-"
"Uterary intrigues? Oh, you're right: It's quite complicated, harrowing, insidious, viciol:ls; and thoroughly fascinating. The only pastime I
prefer to writing is gossip."
He frowned. "Somebody else was talking to me about gossip. Everybody around here sort of goes for it." Lanya was still not in the bar. He
looked again at New.boy. "She knows your friend Mr Calkins."
"It is a small city. I wish. Paul Fenster had felt a little less-up tight?"
He gestured toward the notebook. "I'd enjoy seeing some of your
poems.1I
"Hub?"
"I enjoy reading poems, especially by people I've met. Let me tell
you right away, I won't even presume to say anything abol:lt whether I
think they're good or bad. But you're pleasant, in an angular way. I'd
like to see what you wrote."
MOho I don't have very many. I've just been writing them down for
... well, like Isay, not long.»
"Then it won't lake me very long to read them-if you wouldn't
mind shOwing them fa me, sometime when you felt like it?"
MOho Sure. But you would have to tell me if they're good.»
"I dOl:lbt if I could."
"Sure you could. I mean I'd listen to what you said. That would be
good for me."
"May Itell you a story?" .
Kidd cocked his head, and found his own eager distrust interesting.
Ne.wboy waved a finger at the bartender for refills. "Some years
ago in london, when I was much younger than the time between then
and now would indicate, my Hampstead. host winked at me through
his sherry glass arid asked if I would like to meet an American writer
staying in the City. That afternoon I had to see an editor of an Arts
Council subsidized magazine to which my host, the writer in quesHouse of the Ax 161 tion, and myself all contributed. I enjoy writers: their personalities intrigue me. I can talk about it in this detached way because I'm afraid I do so litde of it myself now, that, though 1 presumptuously feel my- self an artist at all times, I only consider myself a writer a month or so out of the year. On good years. At any rate, I agreed. The American writer was phoned to come over that evening. While I was waiting to go out, I picked up a magazine in which he had an article-a descrip- tion of his travels through Mexico-and began the afternoons prepa- ration for the evening's encounter. The world is small: 1 had been hearing of this young man for two years. 1 had read his name in con- junction with my own in several places. But 1 had actually read no single piece.by him before. 1 poured more sherry and turned to the arlicle. It was impenetrable! I read on through the limpest recount- ings of passage through poindess scenery and unfocused meetings with vapid people. The judgments on the land were inane. The insights into the populace, bad they been expressed with more energy, would have been a bit horrifying for their prejudice. Fortunately the prose was too dense for me to get through more than ten of the sixteen pages. 1 have always prided myself on my ability to read anything; 1 reel I must, as my own output is so small But I put that article by! The strange machinery by which a reputation precedes its source we all know is faulty. Yet how much faith we put in itll assumed I had received. that necessary betrayal and took my carrier bag full of Christmas presents into London's winter mud. The editor in his last letter had invited me, jokingly, to Christmas dinner, and I had written an equally joking acceptance and then come, two thousand miles I believe, for a london holiday. Such schemes, delightful in the anticipation and the later retelling, have their drawbacks in present practice. I'd ar- rived !hree days in advance, and thought it best to deliver gifts in time for Christmas morning and allow my host to rejudge the size of bis goose and add a plum or so to his pudding. At the door, back of an Eng- lish green hall, I rang the bell It answered by this very large, very golden young man, who, when he spoke, was obviously Ainerican. Let me see how nearly I can remember the conversation. It contributes to thepoinL "I asked if my friends were in. "He said no, they were out for the afternoon; he was babysitting with their two daughters. "I said 1 just wanted to leave olI some presents, and he could please tell them to expect me for dinner, Christmas day.
162 Dhalgren
"Oh, be said. You must be-well, I'm going to be coming to see you
this evening!
"1 laughed again, surprised. Very well, I said,llookforward to it. We
shook hands, and I hurried off. He seemed alIable and I gained interest
in the cOming meeting. First rule of behavior in the literary community: Never condemn a man in the living room for any indiscretion he has
put on paper. The amount of charily you wish to extend to the livingroom barbarian because of his literary excellence is a matter of your
own temperament. My point, however, is that we exchanged no more
than seventy-five or a hundred woros. Virtually I only heard his voice.
At arty rate, back at Hampstead, as sherry gave way for redder wine, I
happened to pick up the magazine with the writer's article. Well, I decided, I shall give it one more chance. I opened it and began to read."
Newboy glared o"\1er the rim, set down the glass without looking at it
and pressed his lips to a slash. "It was lucid, it was vivid, it was both
arch and ironic. What I had taken for banality was the most delicate
satire. The piece presented aR excruciating mion of the conditions
under which the country struggled, as well as the absurdity of the author's own position as American and tourist. It walked that terribly
difficult line between grace and pathos. And all I had heard was his
voic<l It was retiring, the slightest bit effeminate, with a period and
.emphasis oddly awry with the great object of fresh water, redwoods,
aRd Rockies who spoke with it. But what, simply. bad happened was
that now I could hear that voice informing the prose, supplying the
emphasis here or there to unlock for me what previously had been as
dense and graceless as a telephone directory. I have delighted in all of
this writers work since with exqUisite enjoyment!" Newboy took another sip .• Ah, but there is a brie.£ corollary. Your critics here in the
States ba"\1e done me the ultimate kindness of choosing only the work
of mine I find interesting for their discussions, and those interminable
volumes of hair-splitting which insure a university position for me
when the Diplomatic Service exhausts my passion for tattle, they let by.
On my last trip to your country 1 was greeted with a rather laudatory
review of the reissue of my early poems, in one of your more prestigious literary magazines, by a lady whom modesty forbids me to call
incisive if oRly because she had been so generous with ber praise. She
was the first American to write of me. But before she ever did, I had
followed her critical writings with an avidity I usually reserve oRly for
poets. A prolific critic of necessity must say many absurd things. The
test is, onCe a body of articles has passed your eye, whether the intelHouse of the Ax 163 Iigence aRd acumen is more memorable than the absurdity. I had never met her. To come 01I a plane, pick up three magazines at the airport, and, iR the taxi to the hotel, discover her article halfway through the second was a delight, a rarity, a pleasure for which once, in fantasy. I perhaps became a writer. And at the hotel, she had left a letter, not at the desk, but in my door: She was passing through New York, was in a hotel two blocks away, and wanted to know if I would meet her for a drink that evening, assuming my flight had not tired me out. I was delighted, I was grateful: what better creatures we would be if such at- ,telltion were not so enjoyable. It was a pleasant drink, a pleasant evening: the relation has become the most rewarding friendship in the years since. It is rare enough, when people who have been first intro- duced by reputation can move on to a personal friendship, to remark it. But I noted this some days later, when 1 returned to one of her arti- cles: Part of the measured consideration that informed her w£iring <:ame from her choice of "\1ocabulary. You know the Pope couplet: When Ajax strives some vast weight to throw, I The line too labours and the words move slow. She had a penchant for follOwing a word eRding in a heavy consonant with a WOld that began with one equally heavy. In my mind, 1 had constructed a considered aRd leisurely tone of voice which, even when the matter lacked, informed her written utterances with dignity. USing the same vocabulary she wrote with, I realized, on the evening we met, she speaks extremely rapidly. with animation and enthusiasm. And certainly her intelligence is as acute as I had ever judged it. But though she has become one of my closest friends, 1 lost pli3cticallyall enjoyment in reading her. E"\1en as 1 reread what before has given me the greatest intellectual pleasure, the words rush to- gether in her vocal pattern, and all digoity and reserve has deserted the writing; I can only be grateful that, when we meet, we can argue and dissect the works before us till dawn, so that I still have some benefit of her astounding analytical faculty." He drank once more. "How can I possibly tell if your poems are good? We've met. I've heard you speak. And I have not evea broached the convolved and emotioRal swamp some people are silly enough til call an objective judgment, but mere- ly the critical distortion that comes from having heard your "\1oice.· Newboy waited, smiling. "Is that a story you tell to everybody who asks you to read their poems?" uAh!' Newboy raised his finger. "I asked you ifl might be allowed to read them. It is a story I have told to several people who've asked
164 Dhalgren
me for a jlidgment.· Newboy sWirled blunted ice. "Everyone knows
everyone. Yes, you're right.· He nodded. "I wonder sometimes if tse
purpose of the artistic coID1lluaity isn't to provide a concerned social
matrix which simultaneously assures that no member, regardless of
honors or approbation, has the Slightest idea of the worth of his own
work.1!!
Kidcl drank his beer, resentful at the long-windedness but curious
about the man indulging it.
"The aesthetic equation," Newboy mused. "The artist has some internal experience that produces a poem, a painting, a piece of music.
Spectators submit themselves to the work, which generates an inner
experience for them. But historicafly it's a very new, not to mention
vulgar, idea that the spectator's experience should be identical to, or
even have anything to do With, the artist's. That idea comes from an
over-industrialized society which has learned to distrust magic-"
'You're here! n Lanya seized his arm. "You look so bright and shiny
and poJ.jshed. I didn't recognize you!·
He pulled her against his shoulder. "This is Ernest Newboy,· glad
of the interrUption. "This is my friend unya.·
She looked surprised. "Kidd told me you helped him up at Mr
Calkins'. n She and Newboy shook hands across Kidd's chest.
"I'm staying there. But I was let out for the evening.'
"I was there for days bUt I don't think lever got a night off."
Newboy laughed. "There i$ to it, yes. And where do you stay
now?»
"We live in the park. You mlistn'! look astonished. Lots of people
do. It's practically as posh an address as Roger's, today;"
"Really? Do the two of you live there together?"
"We live in a little part all by ourselves. We visit people. When we're
hlingry. Nobodys COme to visit us yet. But it's beller that way."
Newboy laughed again.
Kidd watched the poet smile at her banter.
"I wouldn't trust myself to hunt you out of your hidden spot. But
you must certainly come and see me, some day during the afterRoon."
Then to Kidd: • And you can bring your poems."
"Sure." Kiddwatched Lanya be delightedly silent. "When?"
"The next time Roger decides it's Tliesday, why don't you both come
around? 1 promise you won't have the same problem again."
He nodded vigorously. "All right."
Mr Newboy smiled hugely. "Then ['11 eXpect you." He Dodded, still
smiling, turned, and walked away.
House of tho Ax 165
"Close your mouth." Lanya squinted about. "Oh, 1 guess it's okay. I
dOn't see any flies." Then she squeezed his hand.
In the cage, neOn flickered. Music rasped from a speaker.
"Oh, quick, lets go!"
He came with her, once glanced back: the back of Newboys blue
serge was wedged on both sides with leather, but he could not tell if
the poet was talking or just standing.
"What have you been doing all day?" he asked on the cool street.
She shrugged.closer. "Hanging out with Milly. I ate a lot of breakfast .
Jommy is cooking this week so I really had more than 1 wanted. In the
moming I advjsed]ohn on a work project. Kibitzed on somebody's Chinese Checker game. Arter lunch I took olf and played my harmoaica.
Then I came back for dinner. Jommy is a love, but dull. How was your
job?'
"Strange.' He puUed her close. (She brushed Iris big knuckles with
her small ones, pensive, bending, removed.) "Yeah, the.y're weird. Hey,
Newboy asked us up there, huh?" She rubbed her head against his
shoulder and could have been laughing.
Her arm moved under his hand. "Do you want this back now?"
MOho Yeah. Thanks," and took the orchid, stopping to filL the longest
blade in his belt loop. Then they walked again.
He did not demand a name. What does this confidence mean?
Long in her ease and reticence, released from an effort to demand
and pursue, there is an illusion of center. Already, presounded, I am
armed with portents of a disaster in the. consCiousness, the failure
to suspect, to inspect. Is she free here, or concerned with a complex
intimacy dense to me? Or 1 excuse myself from her, lacking appellatiOD. Some mesh, flush, terminal turned here through the larynx's
trumpet. The articulate fear slips, while we try to measure, but Come
away with only the perpetual angle of distortion, the frequency of an
amazed diffraction.
In the half-or rather fOlir-fifths-dark, the lions looked wet. He
brushed his right knlickles against the stone flank in passing: It was
exactly as warm as .Lanyas wrist, hrushing his knuckles on the left.
How does she find her way? he wondered, but thirty steps on realized he had anticipated the last dark turn himself.
Distant firelight filigreed through near leaves. lanya pushed them
aside and said, WHi!'"
A shirtless man, holding a shovel, stood knee deep in a ... half-dug
grave?
Another man in a denim shirt, unbuttoned, stood on the lip. A
166 Dhalgren
young woman in a serape, her chin balanced on both fists, sat on a log,
watching.
"Are you stHl at tbis?' Lmya asked. "You were this faT along when
1 was here this morning."
"I wish you'd let me dig,' the young woman said.
'Sure,» the bare-chllSted man with the shovel said. He shook blond
hair from his shoulders. "Just as soon as we get it going."
The woman dropped her fislS between her patched knees. Her hair
was very long. In the diStant light it was hard to see w,here its color fell
between bronze and black.
"I wonder where John gets the idea faT these projects," the man in
the denim shirt on the lip said. "I was just as happy running off to squat
in the bushes.'
The guy with the shovel made a face. "I guess he's worried about
pollution. I mean, look at all The shovel blade swung.
But other than the dozen people standing or sitting over near the
flaming cinderblocks, Kidd could see nothing outside the bubble of
night the flames defined.
"Can you actually see what youre doing there?" Lanya asked.
"Enough to dig a God-damn latriRe!" The shovel chunked into
earth again.
"You kDow," the ORe on the lip said, "leould be in Hawaii right now.
I really could. 1 had a chance to go, but 1 decided I'd come here iustead.
Isn't that too fucking much?"
As though she'd heard thiS too many times, the woman on the log
sighed, palmed her kRees, stood up, and walked ·off.
"Well, I really could." He frowned after her, then back at the pile of
dirt. "Did your old lady really wiRt to dig?"
"Naw." Another shovelful landed. "I don't think so."
Slap-slap, slap-slap, slap.slap went a rolled Times agairtsta thigh.
JOM walked up, cutting out more light.
Chunk-shush, ,hunk-shush went the shovel.
"They're digging it awfully close to where everybody Slays,' Kidd
said to Lanya, "'for a latrine."
"Don't tell me." Lanya said. "Tell them."
"I've been wondering about that too,' John said, and stilled his
paper. "You think we're digging it too close, huh?"
'Shit," the one who wanted to be in Hawaii said and glared at Kidd.
"Look," Kidd said, "you do it your way," then walked off.
And immediately tripped over the foot of somebody's sleeping bag.
RecoveriRg himself, he just miSsed anothets head. MHlimeters beyond
House of the Ax 167
the circle of darkness were chifforobes, bureaus, easy-chairs, daybeds,
waiting to be moved from here, to there, to someplace else ... He
blinked in the fiTeplace's heat and put bis hand in. his back pockets.
Standing just behind three others, he watched the curly-headed boy
(Jommy?) wrestle a barrel-"Isn't thiS great, man? Oh, wow! Look at
thiS. When we found IhiS, I just didn't believe it-It's flour. Real flour.
And it's still,good. Oh, hey thanks, kid. Yeah, push it this ... yeah, this
way."-around the end of the picnic table.
"Here?" Kidd asked, and grunted. The barrel Weighed two hundred
pounds at least.
Others stepped back a little more.
Both grunting now, Kidd andJommy got it in place.
"You know," Jommy said, staRding back, smiling, and wiping his
forehead, "if you're hungry around here, man, you should ask for something to eat."
Kidd tried to figure out what that referred to when Milly and Lanya
-"p. "It's awfully nice to see you here again and helping out,"
Milly said, passing between Kidd and the fire. The hot places just above
hiS eyes cooled in her shadow. She passed on.
tanya was laughing.
"Why'd we come here?" he asked.
"1 just wanted to talk to Milly for a moment. All done.' She took hiS
hand. They started walkiRg through the blanket rolls and sleeping
bags. "We'll go sleep back at my spot, where we were last night."
"Yeah,· he said. "Your blankets still there?"
"If nobody moved them."
"Hawaii,» somebody said ten feet off. "I doR't know why I don't take
off for there right now."
LaRya said: "John asked me if you wanted to take charge of the new
commune latrine work project."
wJesuS_!D
"He thinks you have leadership qualities-"
"And a feeling for 'Ihe job," he finiShed. "I've: got enough work to
do.' Blinking away after-images of firelight, he saw that the blondhaired guy, with no shirt now, stood on the lip, shoveling dirt back in
the hole,
He moved with her into dark.
ORce more he wondered how she found her way. Yet once more, in
the dark, he stopped first when he realized they had arrived.
"What are you doing?"
168 Dhalgren
"I hung the blanket up over a limb. I'm pulling it down.·
l4you can see?J1
Leaves roared. FaRing, the blanket brushed his face. They
spread it together. "Pull down on your left ... no, your right corner."
Grass and tWigs gave under him as he lurched to the center on his
knees. They collided, warm. "You know the Richards?" Artichokes ...
He frowned.
She lay down With him, opened her fist on his stomach.. ·Um?"
"They're stark raving tWits."
"ReaUy?"
"Well, they're stark. They're pretty twitty too. They haven't started
raving, but that's just a matter of lime. Why do I have this job, anyway?n
She shrugged against him. "I thought, when you took it, you were
just one of those people who has to have one.»
He humphed. "Tak took one look at me and decided I'd never
worked in my life. 1 don't need the money, do n"
She put her hand between his legs. He let his legs faU open and put
his own hand on top, thick fingers pressing between herlhin ones. "I
haven't needed any yet." She sql!leezed.
He grunted. "You wouldn't. I mean, people like you. You get invited to places, right?" He looked up. "He's a systems engineer, she's a
... houseWife, I guess. She reads poetry. And she: cooks With Wine. People like that, you know, ii's funny. But I can't imagine them screwing.
I guess they have to, though. They've got kids."
She pl!llled her hand away, and leaned up on his chest. "And people
like us.» Her voice puffed against his chin. "ScreWing is the easiest
thing to imagine us doing, right? But you can't think of us With kids,
can you?" She giggled, and put her mouth on his, put her tongue in
his mouth. Then she stiffened and squeaked, "OWWw."
He laughed. "Let me take this thing off before 1 stab somebody!·
He raised his hips and pulled his orchid from the belt loops, pulled
his belt out.
They held each other, in long lines of heat and cool. Once, on his
back, naked:, under while his face rubbed her neck, and he
clutched her rocking buttocks, he opened his eyes: Ught came through
the jungle of their hair. She halted, rising. He bent back his head.
Beyond the trees, slriated monsters swayed.
The scorpions passed, luminous, on the path below:
More nees Cl!lt out their lights, and more, and more.
House of the Ax 169
He looked up at her and saw, across the top of her breasts, the inprint of his chain, before darkness. Then, like a two-petaled flower,
opened tOo early at false, fugitive dawn, they closed, giggling, and the
giggling became long, heavy breaths as she began to move again. After
she came, he pulled the corner of the blanket Over them.
'You know, he med to cheat me out of my money."
"Mmm.· She snuggled.
"Mr Richards. He told Madame Brown he'd pay me five dollars an
hour. Then he just gave me five for the whole afternoon. You know?"
He turned.
When he pushed against her leg she said, "For God's sakes, you're
still all hard ...• and sucked her teeth.
"He did. Of course they fed me. Maybe he'll settle l!lp tomorrow."
But she took his hand and moved il down him; agair1,meshed, their
fingers closed on him and she made him rub, and left him rubbing. She
put her head clbwn on his hip, and licked and nipped his knuckles, the
shriveled scrotal flesh. He beat, till her hair on his thighs was nearly
lost in some vegetative horror, then grunted, "Okay ... " His fist hit her
face three limes, before he let her take him. She slid her arms behind
his hip, put her legs around his, while he panted and let go of her hair.
Anxiety lost outlines beneath glittering fatigue. Once he did somelike wake to her back against his stomach. He reached beneath
her arm to hold her breast, the nipple a button on his palm. She took
his thumb as gently, he realized, as she possibly could, in case he slept.
So he slept.
There was grey light after a while. On his back, he watched leaves
appear in it. Suddenly he sat, in one motion, to his knees. He said:
"I want to be.a poet. I want to be a great, famous, wonderful poet.·
As he looked toward the hem of darkness beneath grey streakings,
something caught in his stomach. His arms began to shake; he was
nauseated; and his head throbbed; and throbbed; and throbbed. He
opened his mouth and breathed roughly through it. He shook his head,
felt his face shaking, and dragged his breath back in. ':Wow,· he said.
The pain receded, and let him smile. "I don't think they •.. make poets
as great as I want to be!" That only came out as a hoan;e whisper. Finally he rose, naked, to a squat and looked back at her.
He thought she would have slept through: Her head was propped
on her hand. She watched him.
He whispered. "Go back to sleep."
She pulled the blanket across her arm and put her head down.
170 Dhalgren
He turned for his shirt, '(oak the pen. He opened the notebook to
what he had written at the bar. Cross-legged on the blankets edge, he
readied to recopy. The paper was blued with halfdawn. 'Ybil.e he contemplated the first word, distractions of book jackers, printed praise,
receptions by people who ranged from Richards to Newboys-The twig
under his ankle brought him back. He shook his head again, shifted
his ankle, again bent to recast fair copy. His eyes dropped in a well of
Time magazine covers ("Poet Refuses Pulitzer Prize"), the audience's
faces as he stood on Minor latham's stage where he had consented to
give a rare reading. He hauled himself back before the fantasies! intensity hit pain. Then he laughed, because he had still not re-copied a
word. He sat a while more, unable to write for thinking, amused at his
lack of control, but bored with irs obvious lesson.
Self-laughter did not stop the fantasies.
But neither could the fantasies stop self..laughter.
He looked in the.lightening sky for shapes. Mist beUied and folded
and coiled and never broke. He lay back beside her, began to rub her
under the blanket. She turned to him and hid in his neck when he tried
to kiss her. "I don't think I taste very good, n she murmured. "I'm all
sleepy-n He licked her teeth. When he put his thumb in her cunt, she
began to laugh through the kiss, till she caught her breath at his cock
and another finger. His kneesourside of hers, he swung his hips. His
wet hand held her shoulder, his dry one her hair.
Later, he woke again. with his arms tight around her, the blanket
wound around them from rolling. The sky was lighter. "You know, I
shouldn't go back to that God-damn job," he said. "What do I need a
job for, here?"
"Shhh," she said. "Sh.hbhhh," and rubbed his shaven cheek. "Now
shhhhbh."
He closed his eyes.
"Yes, who is it?" with a timbre of complaint.
"It's Kidd. Look, if it's too early, I'll come back.-"
The chain rattled.
"No. No. It's all right.· Mrs Richards, in a green bathrobe, opened
the door.
"Isn't anybody up yet? I didn't know how early it was."
all right," Mrs Richards repeated. "Its probably about eight."
She yawned. "Would you like Some coffee?"
House of the Ax 171
"Thanks, yes. Can I use your bathroom." He stepped by before she
finished her sleepy nod. "You know you got a letter in your mailbox,
airmail?ll
"I thought the boxes were broken.'
"Your box is okay." He paused with his hand on the bathroom door
jamb. "And therel; a letter in it."
"Ohdear'"
He had already lathered for shaving before he registered her voice's
despair.
June, in blue slacks and a pink a daisy embroidered near the
collar, brought full coffee cups to the table as he sat. "Good morning."
"Were you up?JJ .
"In my rOom. I'm alway.s the early riser in this family. What have
you been doing since yesterday?"
"Nothing. This morning, before I came here, I copied out a poem I
wrote last night."
"Read it to me?"
"No.n
She looked disappOinted. "I guess I wouldn't want to read anything
I wrote to other people either."
He held his cup in both hands, sipping.
"Is that strong en.ough for you?· Mrs Richards asked from the
kitchen doorway. "I've got the jar of instant right here."
"Irs fine.· Black coffee hung in his mouth's emptied center, losing
heat.
"Is Bobby up yet?" MIS Richards asked from the kitchen.
"I heard him moving. What about Daddy?"
"Let your father sleep, dear. He had a hard day yesterday."
June asked: "Do you want some mOre coffee?"
He shook his head, and with his movement the bitter taste spread
over her yellow hair, the plants in their brass pots, the plastic handles
on the green drapes' pull. He smiled and swallowed it all.
Apartment 19-B was open, abandoned, and perfectly ordinary:
Appliances in the kitchen, bathmat OVer the tub edge, the beds
unmade. And there was not one book. Well, it would hold furniture.
The legs of the easy chair roared in. the hall. Silly, he mulled in the
172 Dhalgren
echo. Why don't I ask them where they want it. Fuck-! Tilt the chair
to get it in.
The chair roared; the daybed mattress on its side Ssssssssed. He left
it leaning against Ibe flowered couch, and went back out into Ibe hall
for Ibe chilTorobe.
Two elevator doors opened. From one came wind, from Ibe olher,
Mr Richards. "Hi, Ibere. Thought I'd stop up before I went out." His
tie dropped, severe and indigo, between worsted lapels. "What are you
doing with .:RIb. junk?"
Kidd worked his reet on sandal sole and "my I tile. "I ... well, I was
putting it in the apartment down Ibe hall."
• Mr Richards walked past him, looked into 19-B. "It doesn't matter
too mtlch.· He looked back. "Does it?"
They went togelber into 19-A. .
"1 figure I can get all this stulT out by tonight, Mr Richards." Kidd
was relieved there was no prOtest. "Thell I'U get the floors and ,verything mopped. I'll have it really nice. She't! like it. I'll do a good job."
Mr Richards frowned up at the dead bulbs.
"If you'd ralber, I could .take the sruff into the cellar." Relaxed
enough to olTer, he knew the olTer would be refused.
"Only if you want.' Mr Richards took a breath, and came in. His
cordonn grotlnd on the piled glass. He looked down. "DOn't see any
need. To take it aIllbe way to the.cellar. 1 don't know in that cellar, anyway." Not mo,,;ng his foot, he looked at Ibe remaining furniture. ·She'll like it. Yes." He took his hand from his pocket. "Why don't
you get your other shoe on, boy? You'll cut your foot all to hell."
uYes 1 sir.n
Mr Richards stepped away from .lhe sweepings, shook his head.
·Mr Richards-?"
·You know, I've been thinking-" Mr Richards fingered his collar at
his heary neck; he migh t once have been a heary man-"I mean if it's
a good idea for Us to move. For Mary. What do you think? She takes to
YOlt, you know. That's good. I was woadering what Edna was going to
send us. She has Some fwmy friends. Wondered about you too, until I
saw you out from under alllbat dirt. But you seem like a nice kid. What
do you Ihink?"
·Yourdownstairs neighbors are pretty rough."
"Do you think it'll do any good, coming up here?"
It occurred to him to aCcuse: You don't. But h. shrugged.
"What db you think? Go On. You can tell me. The situation we're all
Hous< of the Ax 173
in now; we have to make ourselves be honest. I'll admit, its hard for
tne. But you try."
"Why do you stay in Ibe city?"
"Do you thiRk she'd go? No, we live here: she wouldn't be able to
do it.' Then a breath that had been held in him broke away painfully.
Mr Richards raised his Ibambs to his belt. "Do you know; in here, in
Ibis house, I almost have Ibe feeling that none of its real? Or JUSt a very
thin shel\."
Kidd wanted to frown. But didn't. Honest, he thought.
"Mary lives in her world of cooking and cleaning and Ibe children.
1 come home. And nothing looks ... I can't describe it. A man's home
is supposed to be-well, a place where everylhing is real, solid, and he
can grab hold. In our home, Ijust don't knOw. I come in from that terrible world, and I'm in some neverland I just don't believe in. And Ibe
less I believe ill it, the more it slips. llhink it's me, sometimes. Marys
always been a strange woman; she hasn't had it that easy. She tries so
hard to be ... well, ciruized. We both do. But what wilb this ... " He
nodded toward the open balcoay doors. Outside, layers of mist pulled
from mist. "Shes got imagination. Oh, that she's gOt, all right. It was
the Ibing I first saw in her. My work, well, it's interesting. But it doesn't
require Ibat much what you'd call creati,,;ty. At least you probably
wouldn't think so. But we get tlrings done. StU!, llihe to come home to
somebody whos got all sorts of ideas, reads books and things. But-'
Mr Richards' hands rubbed at his hips, seatthing for pockets-·suddenly you begin to feel she's changing the world into her own ideas.
She doesn't go out, now; but who could blame her. And once you get
inside the door, itS all hers.'
"She keeps a nice house," Kidd offered.
'Oh, she does much mOre than that. She keeps us too. We all say
things for her, you notice? Everybody who comes in Ibere. She projects Ibis ... well, nervousness. And then you start to try and figure
Out what she wants you to say; and you say it. At first so you WOll't get
berupset. Then, out of habit. You don'ttbinkso?"
"' don't . . . well, not much."
"You do, unless you JUSt fit into it naturally. She used to always like
musicians. And sudden ly e"erybody Who came to see us was a musician, or remembered Ibat they used to play in the high school band, or
something. And that was fine until she had SOme people over to play
Some chamber music stalf-" He raised his head and laughed. "That
was Cunny. Theywere terrible. Mary and I laughed about it for weeks.'
r
174 Dhalgrrn
He lowered his chin. "But that was the end of the music. Now-well,
she's been reading that fellow you were talking about-"
"Ernest Newboy?" Kidd resolved not to mention meeting him again.
"Yeah. And you're here. Once she tried w get interested in engineering. I brought home a few of our younger men. And their wives. I
brought the ones who had the she said. That didn't last tOO
long." He shook his head. "But she makes it aU go her way. Which
would be fme if I thought ... thought that it was real. That if I touched
anything, it w01l1dn't just crumble, like eggshell, like plaster. You think
I should talk to Edna?" He smiled: his hands found his pockets, finally, and sank in them. "Maybe it is just me: He looked around the room
again. "I hope moving does some good."
"Is Mrs Richards happy?"
"Not as happy as I'd like to see her. You know we used to have another-wen,thats none .of your affair. I won't put it on you. I've gone
on too long already."
okay."
"Better go. Have to be in the office by ten and the warehouse by
eleven thirty."
"Hey, Mr Richards?"
Mr Richards turned in the doorway.
'You've got a letter in your mailbox. Airmail."
"Ahl" Mr Richards nodded. "Thanks." He went out.
"-and Mr Richards?" When ,here was no answer, he went to the
haH. Both elevators were closed.
He put his hand in his pocket and felt the mOist, crushed brll. He
shook his head and started to work a dresser toward the door. Three
feet, and he decided to take drawers out.
After he'd moved (urniture for a long time, he went out on the balcony. On the building across, smoke coiled. The mist tD his right was
bright as ivory. When he looked down, the top of a tree was just 'Visible
in pooling haze.
He moved the final large pieces of furniture; then, two at a time, he
lugged off the cane-bottom chairs. On the last lay the notebook.
He rubbed his shirt pocket, wondering if he should ,take a break.
The pen slipped under the cloth. He looked at the emptied room. In
the doorway was the pail, the mop, the soap box. He moved his teeth
on one another, took up the book and sat.
He wrote Slowly. Every little while he looked sharply up, toward the
door, and even toward the window. Eight lines later he put the pen in
House of the Ax 175
his pocket. The already enlarged front knuckle of his left middle finger
was sore and dented from the pen. He yawned, closed the book, and sat
for a while watching the fog stretch and constrict. Then he tossed the
hook on the floor, stood up, and carried his chair into 19-B.
He used a piece of cardboard for a dustpan, and carried the sweepings into the other apartment. Finding no can, he dumped them into
a bUEeau drawer. Back in the kitchen, he clanked the pail into the sink.
The water crashed on the zinc, swirled up in suds; crashing diminished
to roaring, muffled more and more in foam.
"I just don't know what I was thinking ofl"
all right, ma'am. Really-"
"I just don't know the matter with me. Here they are-"
'That's all right, MIS Richards."
"Right in the icebox." She swung the door back. "See. I made them.
1 really did."
Three sandwiches, each with corner hole, lay on a plate.
He laughed. "Look, I believe you."
"I made them. Then I ,thought I'd send]une and Bobby up. Then I
thought again, Oh no, it must be too early for lunch; so I put them in
the icebox. And then-" She closed the icebox door halfway-"I forgot about them. You could eat them now.'
"Thank you. That's fine. All I wanted to tell you is I got the furniture all out, and the back two rooms mopped, and the back bathroom."
"Take them." She opened the door again. "Go ahead. Go inside and
eat. Ohl" The icebox door slammed and just miSsed knocking the plate
from his hand. "Coffee! You'll want coffee. There, I'll start the water.
Go on. rn be in in a minute."
Maybe she is mad (he thought and went into the li'Ving room), too.
He sat on the couch, put the plate on the coffee table, and
peeled up the bread corners, one after the other: peanut butter and jelly,
spam and mustard, and-? He stuck his fmger in it, licked: liver
He ate that one first.
"Here you arel" She put down his cup and sat on the other leg of
,the L, to sip her own.
very good," he mumbled with a full mouth, joggled Ihe sandwich demonstratively.
She Sipped a while more. Then she said: "You know what I want?"
"Mmm?:rl
176 Dha!gren
She looked down at the notebook lying on the couch and nodded.
"'I want you to read me one of your poems."
He swallowed. "Naw, I should go upstairs and finish mopping. Then
clean up the kitchen. You can start getting your stuff together, and I'll
take some of it up this evening."
"Tomouow!H she cried" "Oh, tomorrow! You've been working ter ...
ribly hatd. Read me a poem. Besides, we don't have a thing ready."
He smiled and contemplated murder.
And here, he thought, it would be so much easier to get away with
... "I don't think you'd like them."
Hands together in her lap, she leaned forward: "please."
He dragged the book into his lap Gike I was covering myself, he
thought. I could kill her). "All right." Something tickled the underside
of his thigh. It was sweat catching on the chain that bound him. "I'll
read .. ." He opened the book, coughed: "This one." He took a breath,
and looked at the paper. He was very hot. The chains across his hack
pulled: he was hunching his shoulders. When he opened his mouth,
for a moment he was sure no voice would come.
Butheread.
He dropped word after word into the room's silence.
Meaning peeled away from his voice and raveled.
Sounds he had placed together to evoke a tone of voice mis-sounded.
The machinery was too clumsy to follow what his eye knew.
He read each word, terribly aware how the last should have fallen.
Once. he coughed.
For one phrase he grew quieter, easier. Then, frantically, at a place
where his voice closed out a comma, he wondered, Why did I choose
this one! I should have chosen anyone except this!
Hoarsely he whispered the last line, and put one hand on his stomach to press away the small pain. He took sOme more deep breaths and
sat back. The hack of his shirt was sopping.
"That was lovely."
He wanted to and didn't laugh.
' ... Lost inside your eye ... " she misquoted. No, paraphrased.
His stomach lightened again.
"Yes, I liked that very much."
He arched his fingers there, and said: "Thank you.'
".hank you. I feel .. ."
He thought: I'm too tired to kill anyone.
" ... feel that you have given me something of yourself, a very precious thing."
House of the Ax 177
'Uhh." He nodded vaguely. Tension finally forced the laugh: "You
Just like because you know me." With the laugh, some of the tiredness went.
"Vefmitely." She nodded. "I don't know any more about poetry than
Arthur does. Really. But I'm glad you read it. For the trust."
"Oh." Something more terrifying than the pOSSibility of murder happened in him. "You really are?" A cold metallic wire sewed somewhere
taking small stitches. "I better get back up to finish the mopping."
began to move on the couch, preparing to stand.
"I'm very glad you read that poem to me.'
He stood. "Yeah. Sure. I'm glad you ... liked it," and hurried forthe
door. It closed behind him far too loud. In the hall, his face heating, he
thought: She. was going to say something else to me! What else was she
going ... ? He hurried to the elevator.
In 19-A he filled the pail again, kicked· off his sandal, and slushed the
mop in suds. Foam, mop-strands, and water returned him to varied
beaches. He mopped angrily, remembering waves.
The water slopped his feet. It had been warm when he put it in the
pail Each stroke wet baseboard further along.
"Ihey're cheating me, he thought and twisted the mophead. Among
failing suds the water was black. I've got to tell them, he ,thought, that
I know it. At least ask them why they're not paying me what they said.
Of course they didn't say it to me. Nat that I need the money, even ...
That made him even angrier.
He sloshed up more beaches in his mind, moving from room to
room.
I don't have a name, he thought. Tides and tides rolled from the
tangled cords. These things I'm writing, they're not desCriptiOns of anything. They're complex names. 1 don't want her to believe what they
say. I just want her to believe I said them. Somewhere (Japan? Yeah
. .. ) I walked up the wharf from where the little boats were tied and the
black rocks gave out to sand. And everything, even the sand slipping
back under my feet, looked miles away like it used to all the time
when I was tired, when I was a kid. One of the other fellows from the
ship called to me. What did he call me? And how could I have possibly answered?
His eyes stung; he sniffed for the detergent smell.
Or was the smoke thicker? He wiped his face on his cuff.
l
178 Dhalglllll
In the hall, people laughed: footsteps. A door closed.
Gooseflesh enveloped him. His next heartbeat shocked loose his
breath; he breathed. Perhaps ten seconds later he realized how tightly
he was holding the handle. He laid the mop on the floor, went to the
open door, and looked into the ... empty hall. For at least a minute.
Then he got the mop and began to work again.
They're cheating mel he thought to replay the familiar. The tone was
wrong. To think words set off pricklings.
More water.
His hands, soaked and soaked again, were translucent, the yellow all
out of the horn, flesh white and ragged around the fragment nails and
swollen crowns. Yeah, leprosy: He recalled l1mya sucking his middle finger with something like relief. What she liked was funny. Especially
what she liked in him. Her absence mystified.
Slopping suds over recollected sands, he tried to hallucinate her face.
1t dissolved in watef. He scrubbed the balcony siD, and backed into the
room, swinging cords from side to side.
Confront them about his salary? Yesl Images of gifts for her. But he
had not seen on. store open; not onel Do they talk salary; he pondered,
and I talk wages just to keep up?
But we haven't ,talkedl
The inside of his mouth held much more room than the room. As he
mopped, he seemed to stagger, shin-deep in tongue, bumping his knees
on teeth, and his head againSt wet, palatal rugae, grasping for an uvula
to steady himself. He flopped the mop in the water again, eyes a-sting,
and passed his arm across his face; the blunted chain raked his cheek.
Energies searched though the mechanics of his body for points to wreak
changes. The rhythm and slosh lopped talk out of the brain. "j live in
the mouth ... ' he had been mumbling over and over, he realized as he
stopped it. Stopping, he mopped harder at the swirling floor.
"You .•. 1l'1
He blinked at]une in the doorway.
" ... didn't get ... ?"
He grunted interrogatively.
"You said you were going to get me a ... picture of .. ." Her knuckle
made its habitual strike at
her chin.
"Huh? But 1 thought you didn't-"
Her eyes beat, banal and wild. Then she ran from the door.
"Hey, look, I'm sorryl 1 didn't think you ... " thought about running after her, sucked his teeth, shook his head, didn't, and Sighed.
House of the Ax 179
In the kitchen, he Changed the dirty water in his pail for clear, then
dry-mopped as much as possible of the flood.
He worked methodically. Every once jn a while he made a sound of
disgust, or shook his head. Finally he got to swiping after his own footprints. Which was futile; you just made more.
BalanCing on one foot in the doorway, he fumbled at his sandal.
Leather and wet flesh: He might as well throw it away. But the tab
slipped into the buckle. He picked up his notebook and clacked to the
elevator.
Hail a minute later, the door opened (from Ihe door beside it,
where he did not want to look, came hissing wind); he stepped in.
The thought, when he recalled it later, seemed to have no genesis:
He did not press seventeen.
"16" glowed before his falling finger in the falling car.
4
No bell-box was on the door.
Cloth or paper covered the hole inside.
Jaw clamped, he knocked; clamped tighter when something inside
moved.
The door swung back. "Yeah?" Hot grease clattered.
Behind the man in the undershirt, the girl came forward, her features disappearing to silhouette before the hurricane lamp on the wall.
"What'cha want?" the man asked. "You want something to eat?
Come on in. What'cha want?n
"No, I just was ... well." He made himself grin and stepped inside.
"1 just wanted to know who was here."
"You wanna eat, you can." The girl behind the man's shoulder floated back far enough to take light On a cheek bone.
Against the wall people slept in iron bunks. Men sat on the mat-
·tresses on ,the 1100r. The lantern-light Cast down hard blacks to their
left:
The door swung behind Kidd. When it slammed, only one looked up.
Against the wall leaned a motorcycle with a day-glow gas tank. In
one corner stood a dressmakers mannequin, spalshed with red paint,
head twisted to the side, and looped with rounds of greasy chain (but
none of the kind Kidd wore under his sbirt and pants).
"I been doing work for the people upstairs. I was just wondering
who was down here.' The rOom smelled stale, and the cooking odor
180 Dhalgren
brought him momentarily back to a fIlthy frie<1-food stand where he
had not been able to finish eating in waterfront Caracas. "That's why I
came down.
Somewhere the sound of water ceased. Wet, blond hair dtipping
down his shoulders, a boy walked, naked, into the room, picked up a
pair of black jeans. Glistening, he balanced on one leg. He glanced at
Kidd, grinned: then his foot, bunioned, hammer-toed, and mostly
ankle (with a dogs choke chain wrapped three times around it), went
into the denim.
"The people upstairs?" The man shook his head, chuckling. "They
must be somethin', all the shit that comes down here. What they do to
each other all the time? Hey, you want to smoke some dope? Smokey.
get our friend here some dope. Get me some too." The girl moved away.
"You like dope, manl don1t'cha?:tI
Kidd shrugged. "Sure."
"Hey, yeah. I thQught you looked like you did." He grinned and
hooked his thumbs over his beltless jeans; his first finger joints were
tattooed love and hate. Between thumb and forefinger on the left was
a large, red 13. "The noise that comes down here out ohhat place; was
he beatin' her up last night?"
"Huh?" Kidd asked. "I thought you made all the damn noise."
Someone else said: "Oh, man, there was all sorts of crying and stuff
comin' down."
And someone else: "look, Thirteen; what come up from this place
must be pretty weird too sometimes."
The second voice was familiar. Kidd looked for it:
Sitting on the bottom bunk, out pf the light, was the newspaper
carrier,Joaquim Faust-who now raised a finger in greeting. "Howyou
dOing, kid?"
Kidd gave back a bewildered smile.
There was someone in the bed Faust sat on.
Smokey returned with a glass jar, a plastic hose and brass bowl in
the rubber stopper.
Thirteen took it from her. "God-damn water pipe, and you think
somebody would fiU it up with water-or wine or something. That's
nice too, you know? Creme de Menth. or like that." He shook his
head. "Nobody's got dme. " On the wall he struck a wooden match.
"Some good hash. man." He pursed his lips on the rubber lube. The
flame suddenly inverted over ,the brass. The bottle swirled with grey.
"Here you go!" he mouthed, with U1cked chin.
House of the Ax 181
Kidd took the warm glass and sucked sweet, chalky smoke.
The arch of air grew solid beneath his sternum: breath held, palate
dght, somewhere after ten seconds he felt sweat on the small of his
back. "Thanks ... !" Smoke exploded from his nose.
The pipe had gone to others.
"What kind .of work you doing?"
"Hey, Thirteen, he gonna eat?" somebody called from the kitchen.
Through the doorway Kidd saw an enamel stove licked with burn
marks.
The boy from the showers stooped to buckle his boots. "Give you
a hand in a second." He tucked his cuffs into the boot tops, and stood.
Scratching his wet belly, he ambled inside and asked, "What is !hatshit,
anyway?"
"I've been moving furniture around for them, upstairs," Kidd said.
"Thirteen-thats you?"
Thirteen raised his tattoed hand, then snapped his fingers. "Sure.
Come on in, come on inside and sit." The girl passed Thirteen the
water pipe and he extended it toward Kidd. "And have aaother toke."
Kidd drew in another chest full, and passed the pipe to someone
else who wandered by.
Holding in the hash. Kidd noticed the mirror on the side wall, the
ead table with the crumpled antimacassar ,Iingeriag from previous
occupancy: He coughed: "How-" plosive withsmoke-"Iong have you
guys been down here?" What covered the door hole was the framed
photograph of mother, father, and three children in their dated sailor
suits, with the cracked coverglass.
"Too--" Thirteen exploded smoke of his own-"much. Somebody
left that in the hallway, you know?"
He nodded.
Thirteen went on, "I just been here a couple of weeks. I mean in this
place. Guys in aad out here all the time. I don't even know how long
I been in the city. Months, maybe. Cool. You?"
"Days." He looked again to Faust.
Faust was looking intently at the shape in the blanket.
Thirteen looked too, shook his head. "She got messed up, you
know? I think shes got aa infection or something. Course, it could be
bubonic plague for alii knOw." He jabbed Kiddwith his elbow. "long
as you're healthy, Bellona is great. But there's no doctors or nothing,
you know?"
"Yeah. That must be bad."
182 Dhalgren
From ,the kitchen: "What did you put in this shit, huh?"
·Will you stop bitching? Half of it's from last night."
"Then I know half oht won't kill me."
"Here, do something, huh! Scrape that." A kitchen knife growled
over metal.
"This place used to be all scorpions." Thirteen nodded toward the
bed. "That's when she came here; she decided to be a member. Which
is fine if you can do it. Guys get messed up like that too. But now she
got an infection ... If that's what it is."
Smokey returned with the waterless pipe, waiting at Thirteen's
shoulder.
Kidd took it, sucked; Thirteen nodded approval.
"You ... guys ... are ... ?" Kidd loosed smoke-spurts between his
words.
"-Scorpions? Shit, no ... Well, you know." Thirteen scrunched
his face, with an appropriate hand joggle. "I don't intend to be, again,
ever; and Denny in there," he thumbed at the boy from the shower who
passed hy the kitchen door, "ain't exactly on active duty any more."
And that one's Denny. Kidd thought.
Thirteen took the pipe, sucked, and went off into a coughing fit.
"Hey. will she be aU righn" Kidd asked, coming to the bed.
Faust made some noncommittal lip movement, lost in beard.
"Somebody ought to take care of this girl." He kneaded his maroon and
raveled knee.
She she she "She asleep?" sleep sleep. The hash was coming on.
Sleep.
The olive landscape, mountains of shoulder and hip, was immobile.
Nobody there. Pillows?
Faust moved over for him.
Kidd sat On the bed's edge, warm from Faust.
"Isn't there a doctor any place in the city?" all over the city. city?
Faust's wrinkles shifted around on his face. "These sons of bitches
wouldn't know if there was. I can't figure out whether to let her sleep
or make her eat."
'She must be pretty tired if she can sleep through all the noise,"
Thirteen said. Coming up, Smokey handed the pipe to Faust, who
closed his wrinkled eyelids when he sucked. When he. When.
"Maybe," Kidd suggested, "you better let her sleep. Save some food
for when she wakes up," akes, akes.
"That-" Thirteen shook a tatooed finger-"is brains at work,
House of the Ax 183
Joaquitn. Which are in short supply around here ... Man!" He shook
his head, turned away.
"Maybe,· Faust nodded.
Kidd wondered whether it was Faust or the hash that muddled the
meaning.
"Here.n
He looked up for me pipe. Pipe. Plate? A plate of. Denny. face and
chest still wet, stood in front of him, holding out a plate in a white,
bath-wrinkled hand.
"Oh, thanks.»
Faust took the other one.
"You ain't got no fork?" Denny asked.
"No.» It was rice, it was onions, it had string beans in it, and corn.
"Thanks." He looked up and took the fork. Water tracked on the white
arm, shimmered in adolescent chest·hair, broken with acne.
Thirteen said, "You gotta give people food, you know? I mean, to be
peaceable." Behind him, Smokey, plate just under her chin, ate eagerly.
It had meat in it too. Hash brought edges out from the grease that
transformed the odor. He ate. And those were ... nuts? No. Crisp potatoes. As the tastes staggered in his mouth, a mumed man's voice said
something? Something like, "Stop it! Now, stop it!" and a woman's wail
rose toward the metallic.
He looked around, wondering which other room they were in.
Faust glanced at the ceiling.
So did Thirteen. "See what I'm talking about?" He sucked his teeth
and shook his head. "They really go on up there."
The wail, which began to balk now toward sobbing, could have been
either June or Mrs Richards. He had not realized before four for how
alike their voices were.
Frowning, he ate more of the greasy rice (Bacon grease? Well, at any
rate, bacon) and listened to forks tick tin.
Denny ate on one of the mattresses on the floor, back to Kidd: The
marble knobs of vertebrae disappeared under the corn-colored hair
which dried, lightened, curled.
Thirteen Came from the kitchen at the rap on the door. "Hey. it's
Nightmare!" Thirteen stepped back on his sudden shadow. "Sweetheart,
you just made hash titne! And have something to eat for dessert."
It and the blazing apparition in the doorway went out.
"Come on in." Thirteen stepped back again. "What can we do for
yoU?H
lB'f Dhalgrm
The tickings had stopped.
"I'm looking-" Nightmare stepped forwan!, jingling-"for motherfuckers who want to run." He pushed away the tangled braid from his
shoulder; his hand stayed to massage the heavy muscle below the
scratches, favoring that arm. "JIm not even gonna ask you, Thirteen..
You're chicken shit-' He nodded toward Faust. "Ain't she got out of the
{uckin' bed yet?" Faust jammed another fork of rice somewhere into
his beard and shook his head.
Thirteen stepped back to one side of the door, Smokey to the other.
Nightmare walked forwan! between them. His lips pulled from his
broken tooth and his face creased with something like concern. Then
he shook his head.
Kidd thought how many different meaDings could reside in ODe gesture. The thought prickled through his stuttering ering ing mind.
Nightmare-his eyes were the grey-green of wet, wet clay-looked at
him. And blinked.
"You staring like you got toothpicks propping up your eyelids
again," Nightmare said, grimacing. "Every time 1 seen you. Which is
twice. I don' tlike that."
Confused, Kidd looked at his plate.
"I ain't gonna do anything about it," Nightmare went on.·'I'mjust
telling you 1 dOD't like it, understand? 1 mean I like to make things
clear.1l
He looked up again.
Nightmare laughed, a short, rough thing happening in his nose.
"Okay, now. Which of you cocksuckers wanlS to run? Hey, Denny, wrap
something around your neck aDd come. on."
"I ain't finished eatin'," Denny said from the floor.
Nightmare. grunted and stepped over him. Denny ducked.
"Hey, is that shit any good?"
Kidd hesitated in glistening sheets of clarity. 'fhen he held out his
plate and fork, and watched Nightmare warily decide to take the dare.
The scorpion took the fork in his fist, swept through the mixture,
spilling some, and, fork still in his mouth, chewed, with grains about
his lips. Still chewing, he grinned. "Hey, that's aka)," As he handed
Kidd back the fork, Thirteen broke. the tensions that, with the hash,
had almost grown visible about the rootn. .
"Well, have. a God-damn plate, will you? Here, Nightmare, I'll get
you Some. Hey-" he turned to Smokey-"take him some hash, While
I get him something :to eat.'
House of the Ax lB5
Nightmare sat down on the bed, between Faust and Kldd, leg against
Kidd's leg, arm against Kidd's arm. The figure under the blanket behind
them didn't move. Nightmare sucked the pipe. He let out, with his
smoke, "Now you want to tell me what you lookin' for, kid, all the
time?"
"Man, he's higher than die World Trade Center's flagpole." Thirteen
handed Nightmare a tin plate and spoon. "r been pumping hash in him
all evening. What you wanna do all this heavy shit to his head for?'
Nightmare took die plate but waved Thirteen away with the spoon.
"No, this is friendly. The kid and me, we know each-" ,
Faust, finished with Ihe last of his rice, suddenly put his plate on
the floor, stood, picked up his papers, and marched toward the door.
"Hey, where you going?" Nightmare said.
"Thanks for the meal," Faust mumbled to Thirteen without stopping.
"Hey, motherfucker, so long!" Nightmare bellowed into the wake
of ice.
The door swung open for Faust.
"Good bye!· Nightmare flipped his arm: the door slammed; the
flung SPOOII clattered the picture frame.
The picture swung.
Nightmare laughed. Ice flushed away in the blowtorch of his hilarity.
Thirteen, fIrst dubiously, then in full-throated hoarseness, laughed
with him.
"Toss me back my fnOOn' spoon!" Nightmare howled between landslides of laughter.
It came back underhand from Thirteen. "Now what's the old man
all upset about, huh Smokey? He's crazy, ain't her and looked over his
shoulder as Smokey nodded corroboration. .
Nightmare had caught his spoon and now leaned towan! Kidd. "He!;
an fucked up in the head, you know? Cause he diinks 1 messed up the
bitch." He pointed the spoon at the form under the blanket. "I didn't
mess her up. She got caught fIghtin' fair. 1 wasn't even around Shit."
He swiped food into his mouth. "You know-" grains reM: 10 his
wrist, to his jeans, to the sca<red parquet-"some of these sons of
bitches didn't want no bitches whatsoever in the business." He downstabbed the air with his spoon. "Keep 'etn awayl Keep 'em out of here!
They just gonna mess up the worksl' With a malicious grin he looked
around the room at the people leaning on the walls, sitting on the mattresses, or on ,the. other bunks. Three atnong the dozen of them were
186 Dhalgren
girls, Kiddsaw: but the lamplight was harsh and full of shadow. Nightmare's clay-colored eyes came back and caught his. "Then some of the
bitches got together and beat the shit out ofa couple of brothers ... !"
He reared back, heavy arms shaking. More food spilled from his plate.
"Well, since 1 was boss-man, 1 said come right on in, ladies, and do
your thing! Shit, 1 been livin' of[ bitches since 1 was ten, so it ain't no
news to me what they can do." He came forward again, his weightlifter's shoulder flattened to Kidd's, and whispered conspiratorially:
"When you knee 'em in the nuts, a bitch don't go down quite so fast,
either.» Wlrich he thought was very funny and laughed again. "Good
people to have on your side.» He took another mouthful, and made another large gesture with his spoon; grains scattered. "Magnificent shit!"
he said with his mouth full "Maguificent! Which of you fine young
ladies is responsible?" He swung his lowered head around, mimicking
an exaggerated politeness.
A heavy girl, in a blue sweatshirt, standiog by the mannequin said,
"It was one of the guys ... Denny helped."
"Hey; Denny!" Nightmare'S small, boomerang chin jounced.
Denny looked up, still eating.
"I should throw this motherfucker at you!" Nightmare jerked the
plate back to his shoulder. Kidd jerked aside. But Nightmare returned
the plate to his lap, and laughed loudly and wetly.
Denny hadn't even flinched.
"People are very funny," Nightmare pronounced, recovering, nodding over another mouthful "The ladies had their .problems. n He
thumped his thumb against his sternum among rattling links. "I had
mine too-some of the brothers just weren't interested in having no
white people involved no-how."
Kidd glanced around the room again; everyone in the room looked
white.
Nightmare saw him glance and lifted a finger: "Now don't get your
idea from this. Thirteen here runs the Lily White Rest Home for Depraved and Indigent A-heads; but the true brotherhood is of a much
deeper hue."
"God damn, Nightmare," Thirteen said from the door. "Why are you
always goiBg on like that? We get spades here. There was--" he began
to snap' his tatooed fingers-"what's-his-Bame ... ?"
Nightmare waved in the air. "Tokens! Mere tokeBS. n The nails on his
beefy fingers were overlong and crested black as an auto mechanic's.
"Cause I'm white," he said out of the side ofhis mouth to Kidd, "these
racist bastards here will let me come around to look for replacement
House of the Ax 187
troops. Well, motherfuckers, I'd come around here even if 1 was black
as George! And I'll keep coming around dll both moons fall out of the
sun comes up backwards I " He looked at Kidd direcdy. "But
we re gemng a few, too-though these shitheads would give up a nut
before admit just a few of them even like it better living over
there and bemg SCOrplOBS than hangiBg around this behavioral sink!"
hand, which was still up before him, returned to hold the edge of
hIS plate, about w slide off. "Yes, the ladies had to beat some heads."
He glanced back at the figure behind them in the blankets: "And some
of the ladies, indeed, got their heads beat. Well, I had to beat some heads
w.o, to attain my present status-and though I am now quite satisfied
Wlfh my current position in the community; I would not be surprised if
my head eventually took some beating too." He turned back dark hair
falling in tangles from his shoulder, and made a face. ...
Brotherhood very powerful stuff, man!· Grimacing, he shook his head.
"Very powerful. Hey-?" once again at Denny. "Denny. you gonna run?
We need you tonight. You run it good, boy."
"I dunno." Denny didn't turn. "Lemme finish my dinner, huh?"
NIghtmare laughed again, looked around the room. "He's gonna
come. How you like that, the litde bastards gonna come! I don't think
I'd even take any ofthe rest of you cocksuckers. Denny? It's a good run
with us, ain't it? Go on, tell 'em. n
"Yeah," Denny said with his mouth full, then swallowed: "Its a good
run, okay?"
. you see; these motherfuckers all think I want to be the daisy
m a field of black orchids-" (lower:) "though we have two at three of
those; and no problems with 'em. Butsinc. I been boss-man, I take who.
e.verwants in and koows their business." He nodded to Kidd. "I'd even
take you, and you ain't no nigger ... what?" He leaned back narrowed
his eyes, and! raised a hand like an artist at a picture: "A half-blood
AmericaB Indian on your ... father's side? 'Course the lights a litde dim ... n I
Kidd grinned. 'On my mothers."
Nightmare grinned back, shrugged. "Well, you still got more meat
On you than most of these sad-assed A-heads."
.. frustrated laugh came from across the room. Thirteen said:
Nigh.tmare, why are you always down on us like that? You got us out
as racISts, and chauvinist pigs, and speed freaks to boot. We ain't had
no around here for I don't koow how long.·
':hghtmare bounced on the bed with delight, the back of his wrist
agaInst his forehead, miming a distressed belle. "Me!" in falsetto.
188 Dhalgren
"Me?" eveB higher. "Me, down on speed? I'm just waiting for you racist,
chauvinist pigs to get some mornl'
Smokey said: "That blond Spanish guy hasn't beea around with aar
for a long time ... 1 sort of wonder where he went."
Somebody else said: "He probably burned the whole cily-"
Thirteen began laughing again. moved across the room, laughing.
Others moved too.
Nightmare turned back to Kidd. "How'd you like that idea, goin' on
a scorpion run?"lt must have struck him as funny; he guffawed, snortiBg, shook his head, and brushed rice grains from his chin with his fist.
"You'd picked yourself a nice shiny otcbid'last time I saw you. What
would you do in a real garden party, huh, kid?" Two more spoonfuls
and Nightmare's plate was empty. Holding it between both thumbs and
forefingers, he opened his knees and dropped it. "You think about that,
running. Maybe that's what you're looking for, huh? Let me tell you
something." He fingered amoag the chains around his neck, held up
the tbin brass one with its round and triangular glasses, and shook it.
"You're a fool to wear yours where anybody can see it, kid" Glass glittered, harsh in white lantern light.
Whywhy "Why? You got yo= on around your neck," nd your Bock
our eck ck. He hadn't been aware that his shirt was half open.
"Just shut up and listen now. Smokey Qverthere. I know she's got
one. But you don't see her with it out and waving it, now?"
"You know," Kidd said, "I figured two people who saw each other
with . .. these: wen, they'd sort of trust each other, you know? Because
they'd .•. know something about each other," and wondered if
Madame Brown had arrived upstai·rs for dinner.
Nightmare frowned. "Say, hes got a brain, you know?" He glanced
at Thirteen. "The kid ain't that stupid. Dut l'n tell you: You look at this
and you know something ahout me. I look at that and I know something about you. Well, what are we gonna do with what we know, huh?
I'll tell you what you'll do with it. You'll use it to put the longest,
sharpest blade on that orchid of yours, soon as I ain't lookin, between
that rib, aBd that rib.' His flDger suddenly gec suddenly turned to enly
his Iy jab Kidd's his side. "And don't think for one second I wouldn't
do the same thing to you. So I don't trust anybody I see with one at
aU." He pressed his lips to make a little pig's snout and nodded, mocking sagesse. "Hey, just look at Dennyl"
Finished with his food, Denny had walked over to Ihe manne.qllin.
He took up a heavy chain loop from it, draped dark links around his
own neck. .
House of the Ax 189
"I told you Denny'd run with me. Okay, man. You know when, you
know where. Lemme get out of this freak hole. I gotta hunt some
more." He stood and lumbered over the mattresses. "I knew you'd
come through, Denny. Hey?' He frowned at Thirteen. "00 something
with her,' and gestured back toward the hed.
"Yeah, sure, Nightmare." Thirteen opened the door for him. When
he closed it, he looked back at Denny. Smokey at his shoulder blinked
in anticipation.
"Hey, man, n Thirteen said slowly after seconds of silence. "are you
still into that shit?"
Denny put another chain around his neck. It rattled on the one already there.
Thirteen swung up ms hands and grunted. "Come on, Denny, I
thought you were gonna stay out of all that. All right, all right. It's your
ass."
Upstairs a woman was laughing, and the laughter grew, ghter grew,
laughter: "Stop it! Sl<lp it will you?" in Mr Richards' harsh voice. "Just
stop it." op it, ghter grew ew.
"Look, I'm. gonna bave to get back to work." Kidd stood up.
"Thanks for thefood, you know? And the dope. Its good stuff."
Denny put on another loop, and Thirteen said, NOh, yeah, sure." He
Seemed as disappOinted at Kidds leaVing as Mrs Richards always was.
"Come on down again and smoke some more dope. Don't mind Nightmare. Hes crazy, thats all.'
"Sure." Kidd went to the door, opened it.
The moan stopped mm: hesitant, without vocal color, it came on
behind. He started to turn, but his eyes stalled on the mirror. In it he
could see practically the whole room:
On the bed where he had been sitting, she had pushed herself up to
her elbow: The blanket slipped down, and she turned a face, wet as
DenBy's from the bath. It was puffed, bruised. Though her temples trickled with fever, the sound, as she swayed, came from the driest tissue.
She blinked on balls of scarlet glass.
The door clapped behind him. After ten steps, he released his
breath. Then he dragged hack air, rasping with something like sobbing,
something like laught or aughter sobh ter biog er.
"Excuse me. tI
"Yes?11
"Reverend Taylor?"
190 Dhalgren
"What can 1 do for you?"
On the shelf behind the desk, tape-spools turned. Organ music gentled in the shadowed olfice. "I ... well, somebody told me I could get
those pictures-posters here. Of George," he explained, "Harrison."
"Oh yes, certainly." Her benign smile as she pushed herself away
from the desk, made him, holding his notebook in the church foyer,
absolutely uncomfortable. "Just reach over for the latch there and it'll
open."
He pushed through the waist high door. His bare foot left tile and
hit carpet. He looked around the walls; but they were covered with
shelves. The bulletin board was a shale of notices and pamphlets.
The poster was down.
"Now which picture would you like?" She opened the wide top
drawer.
He stepped up: It was filled with eight-by-ten photographs of the
rough-featured black man. Reverend Taylor stood up and spread a disordered pile of pictures across more pictures. "We have six of these.
They're very nice. I'm afraid I haven't got them arranged though. I just
had to dump them in here. Lets see ifI can pull out a complete set-"
"Oh. I think maybe-"
She paused, still smiling.
The pictures in the drawer were all full-head photos.
"No." His embarrassment have home. "You probably don't have the
ones I was looking for, ma'am. Somebody told me he'd gotten one from
you, and 1 guess ... well, I'm sorry-"
"But you said posters, didn't you?" She closed the drawer and her
eyes, a comment on her own misunderstanding. "Of course, the
posters!" She stepped around the desk and the toes of her shoeS beat
at the hem of her robe. "We have two, here. ThereS a third in preparalion, since that article in Mr Calkins' paper about the ·moon."
Beside the desk were portfolio-sized cardboard boxes. Reverend Taylor pulled one open. "Is this what you want?"
"Really, I'm pretty sure you don't have-»
Naked and half-erect, one hand cupping his testicles, Ha,rrison
leaned against some thick tree. The lowest branches were heavy with
leaves. Behind him, a black dog-it could have been Muriel-sat in the
dead leaves, lolling an out-of-focustongue. Sunset flung bronzes down
through the browns 'and greens. "It was done with a backdrop, right
down in the church basement," she said, "But I think it's rather good.
Is that the one you want?"
"No ... " he said, too softly and too quickly.
"Then it must be this one."
She flipped over a handful to let him see.
House of the Ax 191
"Yeah-yes. That's it," and was still astounded with the memory.
She peeled the poster from its identical twin and began to roll it up.
"It had to be. Until the new one comes in-' as jacket, genitals, knees,
boots and background purple rose into the white roll turning in dark
fingers-"these are all we have. Here you go. I'll get you a rubber
band." She stepped to the desk.
"Hey," he said, putting belligerent stupidity in front of his disconcerted astonishment, "why do you-" He stopped because the idea
came, interrupting his question, clearly and without ambiguity, to request the other poster as well. '-why do you have stuff like this here?
I mean to give away.."
Only later did it occur to him that her ingenuous surprise must have
been as calculated to disarm as his naivete. When she recovered from
it, she said, "They're very popular, We like to be up to date, and posters
are being used a lot : .. they were done for us free, and I suppose thats
the main reasoIL We'Ve given out lots of the first one you saw. That one,"
she pointed to the one he held, "isn't in quite as much demand,"
"Yeah?"
She nodded.
"What I mean is, why. , .'
She picked up a rubber band from the desk and stretched her fingers inside it to slip it over his roll. The band pulled in the fingertips:
he thought a moment of his orchid. With deliberation, as though she
had reached a decision about him, she said, "The poor people in this
City-and in Bellona that pretty well means the black people-have
never had very much, Now they have even less.' She looked at him
with an expression he recognized as a request for something he could
not even name. "We have to give them-" she reached forward-
'something,' The red rubber snapped on the tube. "We have to." She
folded her hands, "The other day when I saw you, I just assumed you
were black. I suppose because you're dark. Now I suspect you're not.
Even so, you're still invited to come to our services," She smiled brightlyagain. 'Will you make an effort?"
·Oh. Yeah." He gestured with the poster: He'd realized before he
probably would not come to a service. Now he resolved never to return
at all. "Sure, What do I owe you for ... this." One hand in his pocket,
he fingered the crumpled bill.
192 Dhalgren
"It's free," she said. "like everything else."
He said, "Oh." But his hand stayed on !he moist note.
In the foyer he stepped around the dumpy black woman in the dark
coat too heavy for the heat. She blinked at him suspiciously from under
her black hat, pulled up her shopping bag, and continued toward the
office door. Between what Nightmare had said earlier and what Reverend Taylor had just said, he found himself wondering, granted the
'handful he'd seen, just where alllhe black people in Bellona were. The
poster under his arm, he hurried into the ,evening.
"Hello!" Mrs Rich""ds said, eyes both wide and sleepy. She held her
bathrobe at the neck. 'Come in, Kidd. Come in. I didn't know what
happened to you yesterday. We were expecting you to come back down.
And eat with us."
·Oh. Well, when.I got finished, !just thought ... " He shrugged and
entered. 'You got coffee this morning?"
She nodded and went off to kitchen. He followed her, letting his
notebook flap his leg. She said, ".he way you left, I there
might have been something wrong. I thought perhaps you weren't
going to come back at all."
He laughed. "I just went upstairs and finished my work. Then I
went back to the park. I mean, you don't have to feed me. I do the
work. You pay me for it, what you told Mrs Brown you woulcL That'll
be okay."
'Of course," she said from the kitchen.
He went into the dining sat. "Coffee, I mean. And a
sandwich, and letting me use your bathroom and stuff. That's nice. I
appreciate it. But you shouldn't put yourself Out." He was talking too
loud. More softly: "You see?"
June, in pink slacks and robin's-egg sweater, a bird appliquM near
the neck, came to the door.
"Hey •.. " he said, qUickly. "I have something for you. Upstairs, in
nineteen.:n
"What-" then caught herself and mouthed: "What is it?"
He grinned and pointed up with his thumb.
June looked confusecL Then she cdled: "I'll help you with the coffee, Mom."
"That's all righI, dear." Mrs Richards came in with a ,tray, a pot. and
cups. 'If you want to bring in a cup for yourself. Darling?" She sat the
tray down. "Aren't you drinking too much coffee?"
House of the Ax 193
'Oh, Mother!" June marched into the kitchen and returned with a
cup.
He liked putting his hands around the warming porcelain while the
coffee went in.
"I did something, you know, perhaps I ought not to have." Mrs
Richards finished pouring and spoke carefully. "Here, I'll bring it to
you,n
He sipped and wished it wasn't instant. His mind went off to some
nameless spot on the California coast, carpeted with rust-colored redwood scraps and the smell of boiled coffee while a white sun made a
silver pin cushion in thettee tops, and fog wrapped up the gaunt
trunks-
"Here.n Mrs Richards returned and sat. "l hope you don't mind,"
June, he saw; was trying to hold her cup the same way he did.
"What is it?" On blue bordered stationery, in black, calligraphic letters, Mrs Richards had Written out his poem.
"I've probably made all sorts of mistakes, I know.'
He finished reading it and looked up, confused. "How'd you do
that?"
"It stayed with me, very clearly."
"All of it?"
"It's only eight lines, isn't it? It sticks very perSistently in the mind.
Especially considering it doesn't rhyme. Did I make any terrible mismkes?"
"You left out a comma." He slid the paper to her and pointed.
She looked. "Oh, of course."
"You just remembered it, like that?"
"I couldn't get it out of my mind. I haven't done anything awful,
have n"
"Urn ... it looks very nice." He tried to fix the warmth inside him,
it was neither embarrassment, nor pride, nor fear, so smyed un-named.
"You may have il." She sal back. "Just stick it in your notebook. I
made two copies, you see-I'm going to keep one for myself. Forever."
Her voice broke just a little: "That's why I was so worried when I
thought you weren't coming back. You really go and sleep out in the
park, just like that, all alone?"
He nodded. "There'Ie other people there."
"Oh, yes. I've heard about them. From Edna. That's ... amazing.
You know you haven't told me yet, is it all right that I remembered your
poem; and wrote it down?"
"Eh ... yeah." He smiled, and wished desperately she would cor-
194 Dhalgmt
rett Ihat COmma. "Thanks. You knoW; we can start moving stuff up
today. You got everything all ready down here?"
"We can?" She sounded pensive. "You mean you've got it all ready.'
"I guess 1 should have come back last night and told you we could
start today on the moving."
"Arthur-" who stood at {he door, tie loose-"Kidd says we can
move loday. By the time you come home, dear, we'll all be upstairs.'
"Good. You really are working!' When Mr Richards reached Ihe
table, Mrs Richards had his cup poured. Standing, he lifled it. The cup's
reflection dropped away in the mahogany, stayed vague while he drank,
then suddenly swam up like a while fish in a brown pool to meet the
china rim that clacked on it. "Gatta rUR. Why don't you get Bobby to
give you a hand with the little stuff? Exercise'll do him some good.'
"Beds, and things like that ... ' Mrs Richards shook her head. "I
really wonder if we shouldn't get somebody else, to help.'
"r can get everything uplhere," Kidd said. "I'll just take the beds
apart."
"Well, if you're sure. lI
"Sure he can," Mr Richards said. "Well, I'm on my way. Good-bye."
In his fingers, the knot rose up between his collar wings, wobbled into
place. He turned and left the room. The front door slammed.
Kidd watched the amber rim make nervous tides on the china, {hen
drank the black sea. "I better go on upstairs and get last-minute things
cleaned up. You can start putting things out. I'll be down in about fifteen minutes.' He clinked his cup in his saucer, and Went out.
"Where is it?" June called from the door.
He closed the broom closet on the mop and pail. "Over Ihere, leaning against Ihe wall.'
When he came in, she was staring at the while roll in its red rubber
band; her fist floated inches under her chin. "You're sure that's a picture of. .. "
"George, n he said, "Harrison. Look at it. Jt
She picked up the roll.
On the floor he saw the Slack of her father'S computer magazines
she had brought up as excuse.
She rolled the rubber band toward the end, but Slopped. "Where did
you get it?"
"You wouldn't believe me if 1 told you. They got them all over." He
Houst of the Ax 195
wanted to avoid the specific answer. "There's a woman minister who
just gives him away." He Sighed. "At a church."
"Have you seen . .. him, again?n
"No. Aren'tyou gonna open it?"
"I'm afraid 10.'
The simpliCity with which she said it surprised and moved him. The
fog outside the windows was almost solid. He watched: She stood, head
sligluly bent, and still.
"Does Madame Brown know about you and George-"
Her "No!" was so quick and soft (her head whirled) he stiffened.
"She goes 10 that bar too. She koows him, • he said. "Thafs why 1
was wondering."
"Dh .. . " so less intense.
"She was in there the night you stopped me to ask about him."
"Then ifs good I didn't go in. She might have ... seen.' June closed
her eyes, too long for blinking. "If she had seen me, thaI would have
been just ... "
Her blonde energies were to him terrible but dwindling things.
"Why-I still don't understand-are you so hung up on him? 1 mean,
I know about what. .. happened. And 1 mean, that doesn't matter to
me. But 1 ... " He felt his question confused among hesitations, and
sloppedtt.
She looked vulnerable and afraid. "I don't ... know. You wouldn't
understand-" then even vulnerability feU away-"if I told you. They
named that ... moon after him!"
He pretended not to stare. "Enough other people are afler him too,
I guess. That's why they have those, huh? Open it."
She shook her head with small, quick movements. "But they don't
know ... ' Unable to look at him longer, she looked down at the roll.
"I know more than they do."
"Hey," he asked to fiR the discomforting silence, ·what did happen
between you?"
"Go read about it in the Times." She looked up.
He searched for the belligerence he'd heard: her raised features held
noneoHt.
"The night the ... black people had the riot? 1 was out, just walking around. There was lightning. And that immense thundering. 1 didn't know what had happened. And then it. .. 1 didn'teven see the man
Wilh the camera until-It's just like it showed in the paper!"
·Oh," which gave her none of what she'd requested.
196 Dha!grrn
She walked toward the door. Just before she reached it, she finiShed
removing the rubber band and umolled the poster.
"Is that him?' he asked, thinking it would be friendly rhe.toric but
hearing a real request.
The movement of the back afher head as she looked here and there
became nodding. She glanced back. "Why . . . did they make . . .
these?fI
"r guess some other people felt the same way about him you do. 1
was talking, last night, with some friends. ThiS girll stay with: she's
maybe a few years older lhan you are. And this guy. HeS an engineer,
like your father. We Were in a bar, about whether 1 should give
that to you."
Her face began to worry on itself.
"r didn't tell them your name or anything. They took it very seriously, you know? More serio1;1sly than I did, at first. They didn't laugh
at you or
" ... What did they say?"
"That it was up to me, because I knew you. That some bad things
could happen, or some good things. You like it?"
She looked again. "1 think its the most horrible thing I've ever seen."
He. was angry, and swaHawed to hold it. "TeaT it up and throw it
down the elevator shaft, then ... if you want." He waited and wondered
if her shaking head was confusion or denial. "I'd keep it ifI were you."
"Hey, whatl; that?" From the way Bobby ran into the room, Kidd
thought he would burst through the poster like a clown through a
paper hoop.
June crashed the edges together. "It's a picture!" The white backing
wrinkled against her thighs.
"Whatl; it a picture oft"
"1t iSn't anything you'd be interested in!"
"D'you find it up here in a closet?' Bobby asked Kidd, walking into
the room. "r bet itl; a naked lady. I've seen pictures of naked ladies in
school before."
June sucked her teeth. "Oh, really!·
"Come on. Let me see. II
"No.' June tried to roll the paper. Bobby peered, and she whipped
around. "ltisn1 tyours!"
"Oh, I don't want to see your old naked lady anyway. Hey, you really got the place cleaned up, Kidd. We ganna carry everything up
here?l:l
"Yeah."
House of the Ax 197
"We got an awful lot of stuff in our house." Bobby looked dubious.
"We'll make it."
June finiShed rolling the crinkled poster, picked up her magazines,
and started down the hall to the back of the apartment.
"l'mjust ganna sneak in and look at it when you're not there!"
Bobby called.
At the halll; end a door closed loudly.
"Come on, n Kidd said. "Leave your sister alone. Let's go downstairs
and move some furniture. n
"Nawl" Bobby complained, though he started to the door with Kidd.
"She'd tell on me if she caught me with a picture of a naked lady."
They went out.
"You tell on her," Kidd said, "they'll take it away and you'll never
see it."
"Is it a naked lady?" Bobby asked, wonderingly.
"Nope. It's not.' Kidd rang the elevator bell.
"What is it?"
"A naked man."
"Aw, COme on!" Bobby began to laugh as the elevator doors rolled
open and stepped forward.
"Hey, boy! This one!" Kidd grabbed Bobbyl; shoulder.
The wind hiSsed.
"Oh, wow!" Bobby stepped back, then shrugged from Kidd's grip on
his shoulder. "Hey, I almost ... !" He shook his head.
"You better watch yourself. Come on.'
They stepped into the other elevator.
The door pulled darkness around them.
Bobby, still breathing hard, pushed "17."
"Does June always tell on you?"
"Sure, she does ... well, not always."
"What's the last thing she didn't tell on you about?"
"What do you want to know for?"
"Just curious. ft
The door opened. Bobby, revealed beside him, had one hand around
hiS chained wrist, stroking the clumsy beads.
"1 can't decide," Mrs Richards announced when they walked in,
"whether we should take the big things up first or the little things. I
really haven't arranged this very well in my head. 1 assumed because
we were moving inside the building, it wouldn't be any trouble."
198 Dhalgren
"1 want myoid room!"
"What do you mean, dear? We're moving into a new apartment. n
"Its just the same as this one; only backward. And its blue. 1 want
my old room."
"Of course, darling. What room did you think you were going to
have?'"
"I just wanted to make sure. " Bobby marched olf down the hall. "I'll
start putting my stu8' together." .
"Thank you, dear."
"I'll start with the couch and beds and things, Mrs Richards.
They're the hardest; but once they're up, you'll really be moved in, just
about, you know?"
"All right. But the beds, they're so big!"
"I'll take them apart. You got a hammer and screwdriver?"
'Well, all right. 1 guess if you're goiag to get them upstairs, you have
to. I'm just feeling guilty that 1 didn't organize this thing any better.
Now you want a screwdriver. And a hammer. You're sure you'll be able
to put them back together?"
Mrs Richards was pulling olf the bedding as he came back from the
kitchen with the tools. "You see, ma'am," he explaiaed, hoistiag off the
mattress, "these big beds, the frames just come off the headboards."
Even so, as soon as he got to work, he realized five full-sized beds, to
dismantle, move, and reassemble, would take at least two hours.
He'd been working for one when (Mrs Richards herself had already
made several trips) he heard Bobby and June out in the front room. He
put down his screwdriver as Bobby said: "You didn't tell on me about
this ... and Eddie; so 1 won't tell aboul your old picture."
Kidd walked out of the bedroom and stopped by the living room
door.
June, her back to him, was reaching into the sideboard.. Silver
clashed ia her hands. She turned with the bunched, heavy spoons and
forks.
"Only;" Bobby continued by the bookshelf, "you shouldn't have
taken yours off." This and yours apparently referred to the optic chain
thaI bound his wrist; he was holding his arm up to show his sister.
"Eddie took his olf, and you remember what happened.'
'1 was just scared," June protested. "Because of all that other stuff.
If you hadn't stolen that one from Eddie, he wouldn't have-"
House of the Ax 199
III didn't steal it! 11
"He didn't give it to you, did he?"
"I didn't steal it," Bobby insisted. "U you say 1 stole it, I'll tell them
about your bad picture-"
I£It isn't bad!'"
"Of couJ,'Se it's bad; if it wasn't bad, you'd let me see it.1I
"Hey;" Kidd said.
Both children looked.
"Eddie's your brother, isn't he? What happened to Eddie, anyway."
Both looked at each other.
The silverware recommenced clanking.
Bobby moved his palm over his beaded wrist.
'Okay," Kidd said. "I guess it isn't really any of my business."
"He went awayt June said.
"He ran away from home," Bobby said. "Only-"
"-he came back a couple of times, " June said. "And did terrible
things. It wouldn't have been so hard on Mommy if he hadn't kept
coming back like that.'
"Daddy said he was gonna kiM him if he ever came hack like that
again-"
"Bobby!"
"Well, he did. And Mommy screamed-"
"Look, it isn't any of my business," Kidd concluded. "Once we have
all the kitchen stuff upstairs, your mother can start getting ready for
dianer-in your new apartment." Which sounded perfectly inane. 1
wonder where Eddie is now-
"We don't know,· Bobby said ia a way that, once, in the mental hospital, when Someone did the same thing, made Kidd go around for ten
hours thinking all the other could read his mind, "where Eddie
is now. He said he was goiag to another city. 1 wanted to go with him.
But 1 was scared."
June looked more and more uncomfortahle.
·Come on," Kidd said, "take the silverware. And Bobby; you start
on those books. We'll have everything up but the rugs by the time your
favher home."
He got most of the disassembled stuff into the hall, a couple of times
thinking that the thumping, banging, and scrapiag might be causiag
as much unrest in Thirteen's place as any running in the halls or bangiag OR the doors had caused in the Richards'.
He loaded spriags and headboards into the elevator-the empty
200 Dhalgren
shaft, whose door apparently opened at whatever floor the car beside
it stopped, hissed blandly by his side.
The ride up in the dark, with only bed springs, the orange number
"19" before him, and his own harsh breath, was oddly calming.
"They should have the padding in the elevators when people are
moving furniture,' Mrs Richards, waiting for him in the upper hall, admonished. "Well, there's no one to get it out for us. There's nothing we
can do."
In the new apartment (an hour later), he had reassembled the
frames and, going from room to room, put the springs on-he was sitting on the last spring, staring at the folded matuess on the floor when
Mrs Richards came in carrying a small night-table against her chest,
its legs stuck forward like four horns. "You know; I didn't believe you
were actually going to get them up here?" she exclaimed. "You really
have been working like a madman! You should take a rest, I think."
He said, "Yeah, l!ni resting," and smiled.
She put the table down,and he noticed her distraught expression.
For a moment he thought she'd taken offense at his flip anSwer. But
she said: "They were back, just a moment ago. Downstairs. Running in
the halls, making that terrible noise!'
Kidd frowned.
"I am so happy to be outohhere ... ". Mrs Richards shook her head,
and for a moment he thought she was going to cry. "I'm so happy! Really, I was practically afraid to take this-" her fingers swayed on the
night table's carved conner-"out of there. And carry it up here. But
we've done it. We've moved! We've . .. don.e it! n
He looked about the room, at the folded mattress, at the night table,
at the dresser out from. the wall. And the rugs were still downstairs.
. "I guess we have ...• He frowned. "just about."
A bubble grew at the caldron's rim, reflecting both their faces, one
front, one profile, tiny and distant.
Jommy's spoon handle, circling the soup, passed: the bubble broke.
Kidd, still panting, asked, "You seen Lanya?"
"Sure." jommy's face was wider ear to ear than from chin to forehead. "She was right over there talking to MiNy-hey, before you run
off again! Will you two be back for dinner?" He rested the spoon on a
black pipe, crusted with burnt grease, sticking from the cinderblocks.
"I guess so. I took off before the lady at my job could get a chance
to feed me."
House of the Ax 201
Soup ran down the granular grey, bubbled and popped. "Good.'
Grinning, jommy went back to stirring. His khaki shirt sleeve, rolled
loosely up his thin arm, swung: the shirt was about three sizes too big.
"It'll be ready about time it gets dark. umya knows, but I guess I gotta
tell you again: Now come and eat, any time you want, you hear? john
and Milly won't mind ... "
But Kidd was crOSSing the worn grass, among sleeping bags, rolled
or airing; knapsacks and pack-braces scattered the clearing, lay piled
around the picnic bench, or leaned beneath the trees.
She wasn't among the dozen spectators to the Chinese Checker
game between the squat, dark-haired man who sat crosslegged behind
the board and rocked with his elbows. on his knees, and a tall, freckled woman with crew-cut hair, who wore much Southwestern silver
under and over her denim shirt; her belt was silver and turquoise. As
her long freckled fingers, heavy with blue-stoned rings, moved and
moved back over the marbles, Kidd saw her nails were bitten badly as
his own.
A girl who looked at first like nothing but a mop squatted (two
,threadbare knees poked up either side) to paw through the cardboard
carton of colored string-what was left ofJohn's "loom" project.
Ana ther girl (her hair was the color of a car he recalled, whose
owner said he'd just had it painted "Mediterranean Gold") sat on a
dented brass drum, lacing a high-topped shoe-the kind with hooks
in place of the last dozen eyes. Her pants leg was rolled up above a very
red knee. A bearded boy stood besida her, talking and grinning, occaSionally pushing his own bushy hair back from an earlobe pierced with
a gold cross. His sneaker, on top of the drum, was wedged against her
thigh. The drum itself held clay. cracked away from the side and shot
with crevices-that waS Milly's "pottery" project.
Neither Milly herself nor l.;mya was there ...
Harmonica notes tangled with the smoky leaves above. He looked up.
More music-but not from above. just far away. And from which-?
He looked around the dearing again, charged off into the brush ...
which dumped him on another park path, sloping up toward silver
notes. He started after them, wondering at how little of the park he'd
actually explored.
The music moved away.
Notes bent like blues and slid, chromatically, from mode to austere
mode. It was as if her major influences (he grinned) were late Sonny
Terry and early Stockhausen.
At the top of the rise, he saw them at the bottom: Milly's bare legs
202 Dhalgren
below her denim shorts, Lanya's jeans; Milly's heavy red hair shook as
she g"-"ed armmd; Lauya's, scrap bronze, bent to her harp. Shoulder to
shoulder, the two girls disappeared around a turn,
He started to run after them, anticipated dialogue fil1ing his mouth:
Hey, I just about gotthe Richards into their new apartment! All the big
stuII is up, so Mrs Richards gave me the rest of day alI. Tomorrow
morning, I take up the rugs and we put the furniture ...
Two steps, and erupting through it was the sudden and inexplicable urge to-follow, to Qbserve, to overhear! What he wanted to do, he
realized, was watch !.anya when she was not watChiBg him.
The path curved right.
To the right, he pushed into the brush-making a lot of noise. WeN,
if they discovered him, he was discovered. He was still curious.
The music halted; were they talking3
That path had sloped down; the ground he pushed over sloped up.
Was he going to come out on them after all?
A sharp drop stopped him.
Beyond rocks and a few trees grown crookedly on the slope, the
path lay Sixteen feet below. Which meant, he figured, come
around the bend right there-and see him.
They came around the bend-and didn't.
One hand above, he hooked! a slender branch; bare foot flat, sandal
on its toe, he waited, a, smile ready behind his face to push forward
when they noticed him. Would he get some snatch of conversation
(possibly even about him) before they looked up and saw?
" .•. perfectly terrified," Milly said in a tone neither flip nor rhetorical.
"There isn't anything to be terrified of," umya said. "M think, with
the rumors of rape and violation going around, you'd be fascinated to
meet the man himself and get a look."
"Oh,the rumors are fascinating enough," Milly said, "in a perfectly
horrible way-"
"And the man is rather nice-" Lanya turned her harmonica, examining it as she walked-"despite the rumors. Don't you find reality more fascinating than a flicker of half trutbs and arudety-distorted
projections?tI
The two young women passed beneath. He imagined his reflection
sliding aCross her harmonica; her eyes starting up-
"In principle," Milly said. "In practice, when the rumors get to a certain point, I'm willing to let the whole business alone and go oII exHouse of the Ax 203 ploring in the opposite direction. Suppose the reality turns out to be worse than the rumors?" ·Oh, really ... !" Lanya raised her harmonica, played. "You're going to chicken out, again, aren't you?" She played another snatch. 'Someday," Milly said, pensively, "I wish you'd play that piece from one end to the other. The fragments are awfully nice.» (Kidd looked after them.) Lanya looked at her harmonica. "I guess that's because 1 never play for anybody else." ·You should," Milly said. "I mean, everybody hears it anyway. Some- times, all those little pieces, pretty as they are, practically give me a headache because they aren't connected to each other." "I'lllry," Umya said. "And you should not try to avoid the subject. Are you going to chicken out?" "Look," Milly said, "going to meet George Harrison was your idea. I just said it might be interesting to talk to him." "But I've already met George,» Lanya said. "I've talked to him lots of times, 1 told you. Going to meet him was your idea; 1 just said I'd make introductions." 'Oh, you know everyone," Milly said; her hair shook. And then, " •• • n which was maddeningly beyond ear shot. Lanya's answer was another burst of music, that went OR as they disappeared around the next tum; a few wrong notes, the tune halted. Kidd crab-walked down the dirt, stepped from behind the last bush, and looked where the girls had been. The mention of George Harrison left a funny feel. A subterranean frown the inner smile still behind his face. His cheek twitched, his lips moved to shape vowels from no languages he spoke. Again he was tempted to run after them. But his CUriosity had shifted a thumbs width toward anxiety. The path, apparently. wound back the other way. Perhaps he could cut through again, overtake them Once more-? Speculation became resolution. He crossed into the bushes, again climbing: he scrambled Over a stretch of rock, pushed forward through leaves. Ten feet away, fifteen-a long note from Lanya's harmonica, a Bicker of Milly's bright hair! He crouched, cheek and one palm against bark. His bare foot, over a root, rocked him unsteadily. Through dull leaves, he could just make them out. There was another musical sound-not her harmOnica, but their two laughters.
204 Dhalgren
·Okay,· he heard Lanya say, 'we'll do it that way-if you want.·
"Oh, yes," Milly cried. "Let's!"
"lfssiHy." Lanya laughed. "But all right. Hes there every afternoon,
almost. All right, we'll do it that way. but only because you're my ... '
They were further away. so he heard less this time-except their
laughter, leaving. What, he wondered, were they going to do what way,
that involved George Harrison? Were they going to see him now-?
Suddenly he was convinced they Were. Their interchange, like schoolgirls planning a prank, upset him. What prank, he wondered, do two
women sanely play on a man who'd just molested a girl only a few
years younger than themselves? He remembered the obscene poster.
He remembered hiS glimpse of Harrison at Ihe bar.
He stood again, took three loping steps through the brush, the worried laugh to stop them with, ready in his throat. (Thinking: Hey, what
kind of crazy idea have you two nuts glitten into your-)
A root caught his sandal toe and spun him out on the concrete. He
almost fell. Pushing up from one knee, he turned. And was suddenly
confused.
Which way had they come from?
Which way had they gone?
He'd only glimpsed them this time. In both directions the path
curved the same way •.. HiS faulty left-right orientation, always worse
under strain-the plague of the ambidextrous, a doctor had onCe explained-gave way completely. Well, he'd Come from that side of the
road. He darted into the other, hoping to catch the path again and head
themoff.
The growth-of course-was thicker. The slope here was so steep
he had to scrabble hands as well as feet. Thinking: When was
last time I saw sunlight a golden flutter in bright green? The sky. flickering through, was the color of iron. The leaves, 'each in a caul of ash,
were loke grey velvet scraps, or dead mice.
Pebbles rolled "nderfoot. No, he thought, they can't be going to see
George HarriSon now! For all he knew,the conversation had changed
subject completely between the £irst turn and the second.
And where the hell was the third? Trees cleared to high boulders.
He skirted one and, leaning on it, vaulted down a small drop, brushed
aside brushAcross flat rock (a section had been filled with cement to level it)
was a buil,ding of black stones, rounded and the size of heads, webbed
in white mortar. Above the buildings several wings rose a square tower
House of the Ax 205
with a crenellated balcony of the same black stone. The building was
not large; the tower was not quite three stories. The vaulted windows,
paned with pebbled glass, deeply recessed, were so thin he would have
had trouble climbing out.
A waist-high wall of stone went along two sides of a large, informal
courtyard in front of the building.
On the corner, wearing black-framed glasses, work-shoe heels
wedged in a deep tenon, elbows on the knees of soiled khaki coveralls,
and reading the Times, sat George Harrison.
Kidd squatted.
Leaves flicked up the image ..
Knuckles mashed in dirt, Kidd leaned forward.
Leaves tickled his cheek
Kidd was afraid; Kidd was fascinated. Whatever caused both left him
clammy-handed.
George took off his glasses, put them in his shirt pocket, slid from
the wall and, work shoes wide and fist-heels up, stretched. Khaki
creases fanned from flank to shoulder.
(Squatting, watching; curiosity and alarm resolved into a sort of se!frighteous, silent mumble: Okay. fun is fun, but what sort of prank were
tbeyup to?)
George's face twisted under a metal sky so low the city's fires had
scorched and marred it like an aluminum pot-bottom.
Beyond a break in the wall (which, Kidd realized only from her gait,
had steps below it) Lanya-hair, nose, chin, shoulders-emerged.
"Hey, George," she said. "You're back here again this afternoon? City
life too much for you?'
Milly {had she chickened out?} was not with her.
"Hu'?" the aspiration voiced and the vowel voiceless; George turned
as she gained the top step. "Y'com'-ba'" (bach or by, Kidd wasn't sure)
"heah tao?" The t was nearly a d, and the final vowel was a strangely
breathy one from which the lips made no recovery. but hung heavy and
open from teeth Kidd could see, even from here, were large, clean, and
yellow. How, Kidd wondered, could this mauled and apocopated music
be £ixed to a page with roman letters and standard marks of elision?
He decided: It can't. "Yo" taking an afternoon stroll, yeah? n George
laughed and nodded. "I hear you playing before, and I think: She
gonna come by" {or was it "back"?} "here maybe say hello."
"Hello! n Lanya laughed tao, and put her harmonica in her own shirt
pocket. "I don't come by," Lanya said. {She, he realized, had
206 DhalgrIID
mis-heard. gonna, with its almost unstopped g and n's loose as I's, as
always.} "I saw you here a couple of days ago, but the last time we
said hello was in the bar. Why do you come out herem the park every
afternoon? III
"To look at the sky ... " George shrugged. "To read the paper."
(Kidd's ankle stung from squatting. He slid his foot over-twigs
crackled. But George and unya didn' t hear.)
"wttime 1 was at the bar-' (Kidd listened to the melodious mflection that catapulted the broad hass mto the tenor at I and bar: Irony?
Yes. But italics, he thought, would brutalize it to mere sarcasm)-"I
didn't even get a chance to say hello. Yqu just running alit of there with
your friends." George looked up at the sky again. "Can't see nothmg in
all that mess. Can't see nothing at all."
"George,' unya said, leaning back against the wall, fmgerlips in her
jean pockets and tennis shoes crossed, "this is the sort of question you
lose friends over, but-" Kidd remembered when she'd used the same
phrase with him-"J was curious, so I fig1ired I'd just ask. What did
happen with you and that girl there was supposed to be all (he pictures
of m the papers?'
'You know-" George paused [0 stick his tongue way down inside
his cheek, and turned half around with his hands in his pockets-"the
first time somebody asked me that, I was mad as shit! But you am't
gonna lose you no friends 'cause too many other people done asked me
now.1I
Wlllya said quickly: "I was asking because myoId man knows her
and hes been-"
George's Cace took a strange expression.
"-been telling me somelbmg about her ... Thats all." unya's face,
after a moment, mirrored it as iC in an attempt to understand it. (Kidd
Celt his own face twitch.)
After a few seconds, Georg. said: "Well, 1 got me an answer."
lCW'hat is
In Ihe kbaki pockets, George's knuckles became a row of rounded
points.
"Well, now I done raped this littlr:white gat, right? I told the papers,
right out, that's what I done." He nodded, like a man agreeing with the
ob\'ious-then glanced at unya. as though considering the new fact
she brought. "Now theres rape and theres rape." George's hand came
free. "You walking along one night and some guy jump-" George
lunged, crouching-"out and grab you-" (Kidd., m the leaves, pulled
House of the Ax 207
back.) unya blinked-"and pull you mto Some alley and tie you up
and other than that he don't touch you, but he pun his thing out and
Wank! Wank! Wank!-" crouching, Harrison swung his fist up and
down at his groin. (Kidd's jaw and buttocks clamped; unya, stillleaning back on the wall, hands in her pockets, watched Georges mime.)-
"and 010. it's so good and Wow-wee that's gooood shit and Dhhhh-!"
George stood, threw up his head, then let it Call slowly to the side with
the end of the exhalation. His head came back up: "If he get one dropon.-" The fist rose with Corefinger toward veiled heaven-"one drop
on yout handbag . .. that is lying there three Ceet away-" the fist fell-
"in this state, that's rape! Even though his pecker ain't touched you ...
just dribbled on your handbag, like I say, see?" George nodded and considered: "And suppose some litde girl who is seventeen years, three
hundred and Sixty-four days and twenty-three hours and fifty-five minutes old, she come up and say, 'Oh, honey, I want it so bad! Give it to
me, give it to me, baby! Oh, pleas.!" George's long head went back
again, wobbling side to side. "And she throw herself on the ground and
pull down her panties and rubbing herself all up and down--" in a jogging crouch, he dragged his forearms up and down between his legs,
pale nails on black fingers clawing toward the ground-"and moaning
Oh, baby, do it to me, do it to me, f want it so badl and you damn fool
enough not to wait five minutes before you say-." George stood,
punched the air-"Yeah, baby!' Both hands went slowly back to his
pockets. "Well, that's rape ,100-"
"Wait a minule, George." Lanya said. "If you're walking home at
nine o'clock and somebody behind you grabs you by the throat and
bangs your head into a wall and hisses he'll knife you if you scream or
don' tdo what he says-No, wait a minute; listen! And you're pissing
In your pants in little squirts while he cuts you once on the arm and
twice on the log just so you see hes serious and then tells you to spread
YOur legs and gives you a black eye when you shake your head, because
you're so scared you don't think you can, SO you bunch up your skirts,
while he's got your ear between the blade and his thumb and he keeps
twisting and it's bleeding down your neck already and he tries to pull
you open with his hand and pokes and prods you with a half-bard dick
and slaps you a few times because you're not doing it right-no. don't
stop me; we're talking about rape, now-and when he's got it about a
ha.Jf mcb in you, he shoots, and while he's panting and it's dripping
down your leg, you finally get a chance to run, and when he llinges
after you, he trips and drops the knife, shouting he's gonna kill you
208 Dhalgren
now, he's gonna kill you, and for the next four days you can't walk right
because of what he did inside you with his fingers, and in courtbecause they do catch him-a lawyer spends six hours trying to prove
that you gave him some come-hither look or your hem was too high
or your tits were tOo big, but they put him away anyway: only next
week, they ask you to change schools because you're not a good influence any mOFe ... Now while you're telling me all this, don't forget,
that's also rape!" Lanya's forefinger spea<ed the air; she leaned back
once more.
'Well," George said, "it is. Yes ... that ever happen to you?"
"A friend of mine." Lanya put her hands back in her pockets.
"Here in Bellona?"
"There aren't any schools in Bellona you can be asked to change.
No, it was before. But you men have a strange idea of the way the world
works. II
"Now you,' George said, "are trying to make me think about something, right?"
"You think enough to bounce up and down here like a damn monkey and tell me a lot of bullshit. I asked you what happened. Ten me
it's none ·of my business, if you want. But don't give me that."
'Well just maybe," George said, ·you got a funny idea toO if you
think this is something I didn't think about.' He looked at Lanya; a
smile lurked behind his face. 'You ask me a question, see, and you
don't wanna hear my answer? The whole point, see, is rape is one pot
with a lot of different kinds of stew in it. Some of them is tastier than
others.' George narrowed his eyes: "How you like it?"
"What?" Lanyaasked.
"You like it rough, with fighting and beating and scratching and
crying-" George leaned toward her, looking out of one eye, one hand
between them, one fingertip wagging faster and faster-"and moaning No, no, don't do it, please, don't do it, but crawling back for more
between trying to get away and a few yesses slipping out every once
in a while between the scratching and the biting?"
"That's the way you like it?"
"Yeah!" George stood back. His fist closed. (In the dirt, Kidd's
opened.) "You know what I tell my women? 'Hit met Go on, fight me!
I'm gonnatake it, now. I'm gonnatake it, see. And you see if you can
keep me from takin' it.' Then we do it--anyway. In an aHey, in a stairway, On a roof, in a bed ... " Georges brows lowered. "That the way you
like it?"
House of the Ax 209
"No," Lanya said. "That's not me. I'd rather do some of the taking
myself.'
The black hand turned up its lighter palm. One shoulder shrugged.
"Then you and me-' George began to chuckle-"we just gonna have
to stay like we is; friends. 'Gause any other way, we just wouldn't get
along. Now I been liking it like that a long time, honey. And when you
like it that way, when you do it that way, then you think about it; and
you learn about it. And one of the things you learn is which women
likes it that way too. Now you can't tell all the time, without askin';
and Some like it more than others. But you learn.' George's eyes narrowed again. "Now you really want to know what it was like, with her
and me?'"
Lanya nodded. (Kiddil chin tapped a leaf that swung down up
to tap it back.) "r asked."
"There it was, you see-' GeorgeS shoulders hunched-"all dark
in the middle of the day and lightning rolling easy and slow overhead
and the flames licking up and the smoke licking down and people
screaming, running, rioting, bricks falling in the street and glass
breaking behind me-I turned to see: And there she was, just staring.
At Ille. People going past her every which way, and her the only still
one on the street, looking like she was about to eat the back of her own
hand, all pressed up against her mouth like that, and from the way she
was looking at me, I-knew! 1 knew what she wanted and I knew how
she wanted it. And 1 knew 1 wanted it too.' One hand was back in
George's pocket. "Now I'll tell you, that ain't something you know all
that often. But when you do, you can either say 'Shit man,' and walk
away. Or, II know what I know!' Now., you an' met we wouldn't get
along." The chuckle ran out into a sound too low to hear. George
breathed. "But her and me, we got alongt" He suddenly turned, took a
step, and halted as though his great body had been struck. 'Shit, we
got along!' He turned back. "I ain't got along with nobody that well
since I was twenty-eight years old and that's been more than ten years!
We was in this alley, and there was this light flashing on and off. on
and off; and people would run in, run out, and we just didn't care! Or
maybe that made it better, that there wasn't nothing they could do, or
that ,they wanted to do.' Suddenly he looked down, laughed: "I remember one old woman with a shopping bag full of empty old tin cans
'COme running in and seen us and started shouting bloody murder and
running in and out, and screaming 'Get off that poor little white girl,
nigger! You do that, they gonna kill us, they gonna kill us for sure!'"
210 Dhalgren
Georgeshookhis head. "The light, I guess, was this guy laking his pictures; I dim'tknowifl reaUy seeahim or not. He wasn't there when I
finished. I stood up, see, and she was lying there, still reachin' for it,
you know?" Once more he shook his head, laughed once more: both
meant something different ·from when he'd done them moments before. "Like I say. she weren't no more than seventeen. And she got hit
and she got punched and she got thrown around and she was yelUng
and screaming, 'No, no. oh, don't, oh please don't.' So I guess it was
rape. Right? But when we fi.nished-" George nodded-"she was
reaching for it. She wanted some more, awful bad.' He lapped the air
with a concluding forefinger. "Now that's a very interesting kind of
rape. It's the kind they always have in the movies. It's the kind your
lawye'r friend was trying to make this other thing into. And when it gets
to the law courts, it's a pretty Tare kind. But the one they all afraid
of -especially between little-bitty white girls and big, black niggers.·
"Well," Lanya said, "it still sounds a little strange. Okay. it's not my
Ihing. But what dO you think, say. about the guy I was telling you
who did that to my friend?"
"I think," George said, "r know a little bit more about him than you
do. And I think;r he'd maybe come talked to somebody like m. first,
we could have maybe worked somethin' out where he didn't have to
go a.nd get himself and some little girl in trouble. About him or the girl,
J don't thiu nOlhing; I don't know tkero. But I think what you told
me about is very." and George dropped his chin, "very. very sad."
umya took a breath. "I'm justslill wondering about the girl. t mean
the one you were with ... Do you even know her name?"
"Well, after I was finished, we did not exactly introduce ourselves."
Suddenly George scowled. "Look, you try and undersland this. I don't
give a shit ahout the bitchl I really don't. And suppose I did? Suppose,
afterward, I'd done said, 'Oh, hey baby. that was so fine, let's you and
me get married and live all happily ever after so we can just lake care
of one another every night!' What shegonna say? 'You cra:z;y, nigger!'
I mean a couple ·of times I tried that, and it don't work. that ain't her
thing. That ain't mine. She ain't interested in me neither. She interested in what she thinhs about me. And Ibat's fine by me. She knows
my was in the paper. 1 gave it to them for free, too. I told
them I ain't ashamed of nothing I done,r like it like that, and I'm gonna
do it again, any time, anyplace. And believe me, that's all slle wants 10
know!" George's scowl relaxed .• Afterward, people was gossiping
around and saying her name was June or something like that. You say
your old man know her? What he say about her?"
House of the Ax 211
"About," unya said, "what you just did." She pressed her lips, considering. Then she said, "She's looking for you, George. r saw her onca,
come up to ask myoid man after you. She wants to find you again."
George's laugh launched high as Madame Brown's and, with his rocking head, tumbled down into its easy bass. 'Yeah .. . I Yeah, she looking for me! She just circling and circling around me, getting in closer
and closer-" George's forefinger circled on the air, spiraled incircling and circling, closer and closer, like the moOn around the sun!·
Something (though Kiddwas not sure what it was) struck unya as
Iunny and she laughed too. "George, you've got your images mixed up!
You're supposed to be the moon; not her. Besides, the moon doesn't circle the sun!"
"Well," Georgesaid, "maybe it usually don't, but this is Bellona, and
you ain't got no way to tell what's gonna happen here!" His laugh grew,
fell away; he came out of it with a serious expression. 'You see, I been
around, 1 know some things. How old are you? Twenty-three?"
'On the head," unya said. "You should be guessing in a fair."
"Well, I'm old enough to be your daddy-"
"You're old enough to be June's daddy too." unya said. "Do you
have any children?"
"I got five of them I know about," Georgesaid, "and one of them off
a white woman, too, young lady. Green-eyed, mustard-headed-"
George screwed his face-"ugly litde motherfucker! Well, maybe he
ain't So ugly. And I got one of them as old now as her momma was
when I first stuck it to her, too." George cocked his head the other way.
"And that ain't nowhere near as old as the little girl we was talking
about. None of the five of them is here in Bellona. But I tell you, if I
was to s •• that oldest girl of mine, slanding on the corner, looking at
me like that little white girl was looking-I don't care if she my kin or
not, I'd do the same fuekin' thing. Now you believe it!"
qGeorge," l.anya said, uyou are incorrigible! '"
"Well, sometimes you look pretty funny yourself, Miss Anne!
Look-" George got back his explanatory tone-"what it is, is that
women wants it just exactly like men do. Only nobody wants to think
about that, you know? At least not In the movies. They pretends it
don't exist, or they pretends ii's something so horrible, making all sorts
of death and destruction and needless tragedy and everybody geHing
killed, Ibat it might just as well not exist-which is the same tiling,
yousee?ft
"Yes," unya said, "I'd noticed. George, people are scared of women
doing anything to get what they want, sex or anything else. Christ, you
212 Dhalgren
men are presumptuous bastards. If I was telling you how blacks really
are the way you're telling me about women, you'd organize. a sit-in!"
"Well," George said, "Ijast didn't know i£you went to the movies
that much so's you'd knOw."
After a moment, Lanya asked: "What do you think's gonna happen
when you two finally do meet again, George?"
George's eyebrows, darker crescents on an iron-black face (the tarnished light erased all browns and reds), rose. "Well, she gonna get
closer, and closer, just circling-" one hand traced its spiral while
the other waited for it at the spiral's center-"and ci£cling, and closer and closer, till-" Georges cupped palms smashed; Kidd blinked;
his back muscles cramped-"Blam! And the sky gonna go dark and
the lightning gonna go roll over the night, wide as a river and slow as
the sea, and bUildings gonna come toppling and fire and water both
gonna shoot in the air, and people gonna be running and screaming in
the streets!" George:wmked, nodded. "Gonna be just like last time."
"I think," Lanya said, "you've got your images mixed again." She
came away from the waH and ambled a few steps across the stone.
'You're doing just what the movies are dOing-making it into something terrible and frightening."
the problem-like I say: You see Ilihe it like the movies. But
when we get together again, we just gonna be doing our thing. You all
is the ones who gonna be SO frightened the city gonna start to fall down
around your head." George's head went to the side. He grinned. "See?"
"Not quite." Lanya grinned back. "But let it ride. Okay, what are you
gonna do afterward?"
"Same as before, I guess. Blam! and excuse me, ma'am, and then be
on my way. And then it starts all over .•. " Once more that oblique expression came to George's face. "You say your old man ... is she aU
right? I mean is she okay and all? I don't want notbin' to happen to
her 'fore we meet up again."
"Yeah," Lanya said. "She ... I guess so."
George nodded. "Yeah ... somebody told me back in the bar you
done got yourself a new boy friend. Thats nice. "
Where, Kidd wondered, was Milly? .
"Things get around. " Lanya smiled, and Kidd had an image of her
suddenly snatching her harmonica to fling up some fusillade of notes
to hide her embarrassment. Only she didn't look embarrassed. (He
remembered wanting to overhear Lanya and Milly discussing him;
the prospect {)£ a discussion of him with George left him vaguely unHouse of the Ax 213 comfortable.) Fingers hooked over her pocket rim, Lanya was toying with her harmonica. "Yeah. I don't know if I'd say I got him; how about getting?" "Well, you sure get yourself some winners! That last one .. ." George shook his head. "What did you think of Phil, George?" The subject, almost as un- comfortably, had changed. "1 thought he was crazy!" George said. "I thought he was a stuckup, up-tight, tight-assed asshole-Smart? Oh, he was smart as a whip. But I'm still glad to see you shut of him." George paused; his brows wrin- kled. "Though I guess maybe you ain't ... ?" "I don't know.» Lanya's lowered eyes suddenly rose. "But that's eas- ier to say if you got a new one, isn't it?" "Well-" George's laugh carne out surprising and immense-"I guess it is. Say, when you gonna bring your old man on down to Jack- son and say hello?" "Well, thanks," Lanya said. "Maybe we'll COme down ... if we don't see you in the bar, first.» "Gotta check your new old man out," George said. "First, see, I thought maybe you'd get involved with one of them 'faggot fellas up at Teddy's. God damn, sometimes 1 think there ain't nobody in the city no more ain't a faggot but me." "Is that a standard male, heterosexual fantasy?" Lanya asked. "I mean, to be the only straight man around when all the others are gay?" "I ain't got nothing against faggots," George said, "You seen them pictures them boys made of me? Something, huh? Some of my best friends is-" uGeorge!» Lanya held up her hand, her face in mock pain. "Come on, don't say it!lI "Look-" George's gestures became sweepingly gallant-"I just like to make sure all my friends is taken care of. If you wasn't getting none, see, I was gonna volunteer to make an exception in my standard meth- ods of procedure and fit you in my list. We got to watch out for our friends? Now, donJt we?lI "Thats sweet of you,· Lanya said. "But I'm royally taken care of in that department" And Kidd, glOriously happy, put his other knee on the ground and sat back. A thought, circling below articulation, suddenly surfaced, dripping words: they hnow each other ... were the first that fell alI it; more followed, obscuring clear thought with lapped, resonant rings.
214 Dhalgren
He remembered the poster. It was the same man, with the same, dark,
rough face (the face was laughing now), the same body (the khaki coverall was mostly too loose but noW and again, when a leg moved so or
a shoulder turned, it seemed abo\lt to tear at arm or thigh), that he'd
seen reprod\lced, bared, black, and bronze-lit.
"Well, then-" George made a slate-wiping motion-"everything's
fine! You two come on down. I'd like to meet this guy. You pick 'em
pretty interesting.'
·Okay." Lanya said: "Well, I guess I'm gonna be on my way. j\lst
stopped in to say hello."
Now, Kidd tho\lght, now MiJ;\y Is going to jump out and ..• ?
·Okay. I see YO\l,' George said. "Maybe later in the bar.'
Now ... ?
"So long. n hnya turned around and started down the steps.
George shook his head, went back to tile wall-glanced after her
once-picked \lp t\le newspaper and whHe he shook it O\lt, speared
two fingers at his breast pocket for his glasses. He got them on the
third try.
Harmonica notes twisted up like silver wires in the haze.
Kidd waited half a dozen breaths, realizing finally he had misjudged
Lanya's and MiRy's intentions. Milly had, apparently, chickened out
Again he wondered from what. Backing into thicker brush, he stood
with cramping thighs and, ignoring them, drcled the coUrt. The
ground sloped sharply. This time, if he could overtake her on the path,
he would not hideThe music wound in the smoke toward some exotic cadence that,
when achieved, slid it into a new key where the melody defined itself
along burbling triplets till another cadence, in six'measures, took it
home.
He came out on the side of the steps. Small branches tugged his hips
and shoulders, swished away.
Lanya, at the bottom of the flight,ambled onto the path, dragging
her mask after like a silver cape.
And she had almost completed the song. (He had never heard her
play it through.) Its coda hauled up the end iB one of those folk suspensions that juxtapose two unrelated chords to hold a note{rom one
above the other and make chaos of it, Starting down the steps behind
her, he got chills, not from fear or confusion, but from the music's
moment which sheared through mouse-grey mist glimmering in the
leafy corridor.
House of the Ax 215
He tried to walk silently, twice stopped entirely, not to break the
melody before its end.
He was on the boltom step. She was fifteen feet ahead.
The melody ended.
He hurried.
She turned, lips {ogetber for some word that began with "m.' Then
her eyes widened: "Kidd-' and she smiled. "What are you doing
here- ?" and took his hand.
"I was spying on you," he said, "and George.'
She raised an eyebrow. "You were71'1
"Yeah." They walked together. "I liked your song."
"Oh ... "
He glanced over.
She was more embarrassed, he realized, by his overhearing the
music than the conversation. While he was wondering what to offer
her te> atone, she managed to say:
"Thank you; softly, "though."
He squeezed her hand.
She squeezed his.
Shoulder to shoulder, they walked up the path, while Kidd's mind
turned and sorted and wondered what hers turned and sorted. He
asked, suddeuly: "The person you were telling George about, who got
raped_ was that Milly?"
Lanya looked up, surprised "No ... orlet's say that I'd rather not say."
"Huh? What does that mean, no or you'd rather not say?"
Lanya shrugged. "I just mean Milly probably wouldn't want me to
say, one way or the other. It
Kidd frowned. "That doesn't make sense."
Lanya laughed, without letting it out, so that it was only an expression, a breath through her nose, her head shaking. She shrugged again.
"Look, just give me a simple a·nswer, was she or_?710
"Now you look,' Lanya said: "You're a very SWeet man, and I know
you're not doing it on purpose, ifs just the habit men get into of trying
to undermine anything that goes on between two women. But stop it.·
He was confused
She asked: "Okay ... ]"
Confused, he agreed. ·Okay.·
They wandered on. The song, etched on memory, flligreed, in memory, the silent, p"esent trees. The sky had deepened to a color that could
be caHed blue, in leaf-shaped flakes among tbem.
216 Dhalgren
Confused, he was still happy.
At the commune clearing, Milly, withJommy at the furnace, turned,
saw them, and ran over. 'Tanya, Kidd,-" and to Lanya: "Did you tell
him?H
umya said: "No. I didn't, yet ... "
·Oh, Kidd, I'm afraid-" Milly took another breath; she had been
running more than just from the furnace. "I'm afraid I was spying on
the two of you most of the way back here." She laughed. "You see, we
decided I was going to hide in the bushes and overheaT Lanya and
George-"
"Huh?" Kidd said.
Lanya said: "He's not so bad after all-"
"Kidd?·" Milly said. "Oh-you mean George! No, of course he isn't
... " Back to Kidd: "r was going to cOme out and join Lanya again on
the path back from the Weather Tower-" ,then it wasn't the
monastery; but he'd well decided it couldn't have been-"when I saw
you pop out on the steps, thirty seconds before I was going to!'
He said to Lanya: "Then you were expecting ... ?" The half-dozen
questions in his mind were halved again when Milly said:
"I couldn't keep close enough to hear everything you were saying.
If I had, I would have made too much noise. I just cut straight ,through
and caught the paths on the snake-turns. Oh, Lanya, it is a lovely song!
Really, you've got to play it for other people. See, you can play it all the
way through. I told you you could. You knew I was listening, and you
got through it. Just don't let people embarrass you ... Kidd-?" Milly
frowned. "You look so confused, Kidd!" Suddenly she hugged him; red
hair brushed dry against his face. He nearly stumbled. "Really, I'm
sorty!" She released him, put her hand on Lanya's shoulder. "I didn't
mean to spy. But yo .. knew I was there ..• " She looked imploringly at
Lanya. "I just couldn'tresiSt!" And she1aughed.
He blinked; he smiled. " ... that's all right." The memory of the
melody came again; it had not been a private moment he'd overheard,
but one meant for a friend. Had that, he wondered, given itits beauty?
Lanya was laughing too.
So he laughed with them.
At thdurnace, Jommy banged his ladle On the caldron. 'Come on!
Soup's ready! Come and get it!"
About the clearing, with mess-pans and mess-pots, crocks and tin
cups and bowls, two dozen people gathered at the fire.
"Come on, eat, n Lanya said.
House of the Ax 217
IlYes, you too, Milly said. "Come on."
He followed the girls toward the crowd. A thin, ginger-haired spade
with gold-rimmed teeth gave him a dented enamel soup plate. "\ got
two, man. You can take this one." But when he reached the front, at
the furnace, for his ladle-full, it wasJohn (with swinging vest and eyeglasses full of flame), not Jommy. who served. The sky was almost
dark. Though firelight lay coppery against Milly's hair, he could not
make out, on either bare leg, as he followed Milly and led Lanya out
among the crowd, trying to balance his bowl, that scratch.
Dusk had come qUickly-and lingered, holding off dark. They sat on
the rumpled blankets at Her Place. He squinted up between lapped
leaves while the sky drizzled powdery rubbings, gritty and cooL
"One more day's work at the Richards, and I'll have them moved."
"You've ... well, you've got a name now: And a job. Are you happy?"
"Shit-" He stretched out on his back and felt beneath him twigs,
creases, pebbles, and the beaded chain around him. "I haven't even
decided how to spell it. And they still haven't paid me more than that
first five dollars."
"If they don't pay you-" she stretched out too-"why do you go
back?"
He shrugged. "Maybe they know if they gave me my money, I
wouldn't come." He shrugged again: "It doesn't matter. Like I told
Madame Brown, I'm just an observer. They're fun to watch." Thinking:
Someday I'm going to die. He glanced at her: "Do you know, I'm afraid
of dying. A lot."
4fHmr
"I am. Sometimes, when I'm walking around, I think maybe my
heart is going to stop. So I feel it, just to make sure it's going. Which
is funny, because if I'm lying down, about to go to sleep, and I can hear
my heart gOing, I have to move into another position, or I get scared'-"
"-that it might stop and you'll hear it?" she asked.
"Yeah.n
"That happens to me sometimes. When I was fifteen, in boarding
school, I sat on the edge of the main building roof for a long time and
thought about committing suicide."
"I've never wanted to kill myself," he said. "Never in my life.
Sometimes I thought I was going to-because I'd gotten Some crazy
compulsion, to jump off a building or throw myself under a train, just
218 Dhalgrrn
to see what dying was like. But I never thol!lght that life wasn't worth
living, or that there was any situation so bad where just sitting it out
wouldn't fix it up-that's if I couldn't get up and go somewhere else.
But not wanting to kill myself doesn't stop me thinking about death.
Say, has this ever happened to you? You're walking along a street, or
sitting in a room, or lying down on the leaves, or even talking to people, and suddenly the thought comes-and when it comes, it comes all
through YOl!llike a stop-action ftlm of a crystal forming or an opening
bud: 'I am going to die.' Someday, somewhere, I will be dying, and five
seconds after that, I will be dead. And when it comes it comes like-"
he smashed cupped palms together in the air so sharply she jumped-
"that! And you know it, know your own death, for a whole second,
three seconds, maybe five or ten ... before the thought goes and you
only remember the words you were mumbling, like 'Someday I will
die,' which isn't the thought at all, just its ashes.'
"Yes ... yes, that's happened to me."
"Well, I think all the buildings and the bridges·and the planes and
the books and the symphonies and the paintings and the spaceships
and ,the submarines and ... and the poems: they're just to keep people's minds occupied so it doesn't happen-again." After a while he
said: "George Harrison . .. :n
She said: "June Richards ... " and glanced at him. When he said nothing, she said: "I have this picture, of us going down to the bar one night,
and you saying, 'Hey, man, come on with me. I want you to meet a
friend of mine,' and George says, 'Why sure!'-and he probably would,
,too; he knows how small the world is he's acting moon for-so you take
him, in all his big, black, beautiful person up to that pink brick highrise with all the broken windows and you get a-hold of Miss Dementedsweetness-and-light, and you say, 'Hey, udy, fve just brought you His
Midnight Eminence, in the nesh. June, meet George. George, meet
June.' I wonder what they'd ,talk about-on her territory?"
He chuckled. "Oh, I don't knOw. He might even say, Thank you.
After all, she made him what he is today." He blinked at the leaves. "It's
fascinating, life the way it is; the way everything sits together, colors,
shapes, pools of water with leaves in them, reflections on windows,
sunlight when there's sun, cloudlight when it's cloudy; and now fm
somewhere where, if the smoke pulls back at midnight and George and
the moon are up, I might see two shadows instead of one.' He
stre.tched his hands behind hitn on the blanket. He knocked something-which was his orchid, rolling acrosS his notebook cover.
House of the Ax 219
"When I was at Art School, tI she said. "1 remember an instructor of
mine saying that it was only on days like you have here that you know
the true color of anything. The whole city, all orBellona, it's under perpetual north light.'
"Mmm," he said.
What is this part of me that lingers to overhear my own conversaI lie rigid in the rigid circle. It regards me from diametric points,
wuhout sex, and wise. We lie in a rigid city, anticipating winds. It ciT"
cles me, intimating only by position it knows more than I want
to. There, it makes a gesture too masculine before ecstatic scenery.
Here, it suggests femininity, pausing at gore and bone. It dithers and
stammers, confronted by love. It bows a blunt, mumbling head before
injustice, rage, or even its like ignorance. Still, I am convinced that at
,the proper shock, it would turn and call me, using those hermetic syllables I have abandoned on the crags of a broken conscience, on the
planes of charred consciousness, at the entrance to the ganglial city.
And I would raise my head.
"You ... " he said, suddenly. It was dark. you happy, I mean,
living like this?"
"Me?" She breathed a long breath. "Let me see ... before I came
here, I was teaching English to Cantonese children who'd just arrived
New York's Chinatown. Before that, I was managing a pornographIC bookstore on 42nd Street. And before that, for quite a while, I was a
self-taught tape-jockey at WBAI-FM, in New York, and before that, I
was doing a stint at her sister station KPFA, in Berkeley, Cal. Babes, I
am so bored here that 1 don't think, since fve come, I've ever been more
than three minutes away from Some really astOnishing act of violence."
And suddenly, in the dark, she rolled against hitn.
"Gatta run." Click. The tie knot rose.
"Hey, Mr Richards?" Kid put down his own cup.
'Yes, Kidd?" Mr Richards, already in the doorway, turned back.
'What do you want?"
Bobbyspooned at his frosted cereal. There was no milk. June traced
a column in the Friday, October 24, 1985 Times with her forefinger. It
was several weeks old.
"I want to know about my money.'
'You need some more? I'll have Some for you when I get home this
evening,"
220 Dhalgren
"I want to know how much I'm getting."
"Hm? Oh. Well, we'll have to figure that out. Have you been keeping track of how long you've been working each day?"
"More or less," Kidd said. "Madame Brown told me you were going
to give me five bucks an hour."
Mr Richards took the door knob. "That's pretty high wages." He
shook his head,thoughtflllly.
"Is that what you told her?"
The koob turned. "We better talk abollt it later on this evening.'
The door closed on his smHe.
Kiddturned back to Mrs Richards.
She sipped, '"Yes flickering above the china rim.
"I mean thats what you told herl isn't it?"
"Five dollars an hour is quite high. For unskilled labor." The cup
lowered to her chin.
"Yeah, but not fa! furniture movers. Look, let me go downstairs and
finish bringing up the rugs and the clothes. ItS only going to take another half-dozen trips. I'll be through before you getstarted on lunch."
Kidd got up too noisily and went to the door.
Bobbys spoon,. silent the exchange, crunched again.
Junes eyes had stayed down. but once more her finger moved.
From the doorway Kidd glanced back at her (as moments before her
father had glanced back at him) and uied to set her against Georges
and conversation of the previous afternoon. Bllt, with blonde
head and pink reflection fuzzed in the polish-she seemed as at home
among the fluted, white china cups, the brass pOts of plants, the green
mats, the blue floweIed drapes, her mother, her brother, the wide windows, or the green wallpaper with its paler green florm.
Down on seventeen, he came into the apartment (unchained, unlocked) and thought: Why dido't we take the rugs IIp first? That was
silly, not to have taken the rugs up. Like mottled eels (the undelpad,
a smaller darker eel, printed with a design that, till now, he'd only Seen
on corrugated ceilings) the rugs lay against the living room wall. Outside the window, pale leviathans swam. Piles of books sat on the floor.
Pilgrimage was on top of one.
For the third-or was it the fourth? Or the fifth?-time he picked
it up, read at random pages, waiting to be caught and driven into the
work. But ,the receptivity he tried to bring was again and again hooked
House of the Ax 221
aWllY by some pattern of shadow on the bare vinyl tile, some sound in
the apartment below, some itch on his own body: and there went all
his attention. Though his eye moved over the print, his place and the
printS sense were lost: At last he lay the book back on the pile, and put
II book from another pile on top, as though-and wondered why he
,thought of it this way-the first book were his own.
He stood up-he had been squatting-and gazed around: still to be
moved were bridge tables from the back storage closet, folding chairs
scrolled arms, green cushions, and black metal hinges; and toys
from Bobbys room, scattered among them. A set of four nest tables was
crowded with small, bright breakables.
He wandered down the hall (there was the carton of papers from Mr
Richards' den) and turned into Bobbys room. Most of what was left was
evidence of the older brother who'd once shared it: a handken:hief that
had fallen out of a bureau drawer yesterday, shOwing the monogram:
EGR; propping the closet door were three small cartons with Eddy written across them in magic marker; on the floor was the Bellona High
School Yearbook. Kidd picked it up and paged through: Edward Garry
Richards (Soccer team, G.O. Volunteer, "The Cafeteria Staff's favorite
two years runniog ... ") was Camera Shy.
He lay the book down on the boxes, wandered across the han into
Junes room: On the window sill was the tepee of an empty matchbook
and a white plastic flower pot still filled with earth which, June had
told him yesterday, had once grown a begonia her aunt Marianne had
given her tWo Easters ago.
In memory he refurnished the space with the pieces he'd taken upstairs the previous day and tried to pull back, also from memory, the
image of June that had come to him in George's overheard converse.
Memory failed at a sound outside.
Kidd stepped back into the hall as Bobby came from the living room;
he grunted, over an armful of books, "I'm taking these upstairs."
"Why don't you take about half of them?"
"Maybe-" two books fell-"I better."
June came in: nOh, hey, I'll take some of those ... " They divided the
stack, left.
Where, he wondered as the door closed (the unlatched chain swung
and swung over green paint), is my notebook? Of course; down the hall
in what had been the back bedroom, from when he'd stopped in this
apartment out of habit when he'd first Come in the morning: He had
momentarily forgotten that the Richards were living on nineteen now.
222 Dhalgren
In the back bedroom another file box stood alI center in the mid.
die of the floor.
The notebook was on the wi.ndow sill Kidd walked up to it, looked
at the worn, smeared cardbo ... d. Outside, small darknesses moved
below the mist. What, he thought, should I say to Mr Richards about
my money? Suppose Mr Richards comes back this evening and doesn't bring up the subject? Kidd considered writing down alternative
opening lines and rehearsing them for Mr Richards' return. No. No,
that's exactly the wrong way! It's almost nine O'clock, he thought, and
too smoky to tell people from shadows at seventeen stories_
Something ,thumped; a girl cried out. A second thump, and her pitch
changed. A third-it sounded like ,toppling furniture-and her cry
swooped. A fourth ended it.
That was from the apartment below.
Breaking glass, much nearer, brought his eyes from the floor.
Kidd went to the. living room.
Mrs Richards, kneeling over something shattered, looked up and
shook her head. "I . . . "
He stopped before her restrained confusion.
•... 1 dropped one of the-"
He could not tell what the figurine had been.
·So thin-these walls are so very thin. Everything comes through.
1 was so startled .•. " By the nest tables, she picked faster in the bright,
black shards, white matte overside.
"I hope it wasn't anything you reaIly-" but was halted by his own
inanity.
"Oh, that's all right. Here, I've got it all." She stood,cupping chips.
"I heard that awful ... and I dropped iI."
"They were going on pretty loud." He tried to laugh, but before her
gaze, he let the laugh die in breath. "Mts Richards, it's just noise. You
shouldn't let yourself get so upset about it."
"What are they doing down there? Who are they?"
He thought she might crush the ceramic between her palms.
"They're just some guys, some girls, who moved into the downstairs
apartment. They're not out to bother you. They think the noises from
up here are prelty strange too."
"Just moved in? How do you mean, they just moved in?"
He watched her expression lurch at fear, and not achieve even that.
"They wanted a roof, 1 guess. So they took it over."
"Took it over? They can't come in here and take it over. What hap.
House of the Ax 223
ptned to the couple who lived there before? Management doesn't know
things like this are going on. The front doors used to be closed at ten
o'clock, every night! And locked! The first night they started making
those dreadful sounds, I sent Arthur out for one of the guards: Mr
Phillips, a very nice West Indian man, he's always in front of our building. till one in the morning. Arthur couldn't find him. He'd gone away.
All the guards. And the attendants for the garage. I want you to know
1 put that in my letter to Management. I certainly did.' She shook her
head. "How can they just come in and take over?'
"They just •.. Ma'am, there aren:tany more guards, and nobody was
living there; they just moved in. Just like you're moving into nineteen."
"We're not just moving in!" Mrs Richards had been looking about.
Now she walked into the kitchen. "I wrote Management. Arthur went
to see them. We got the key from the office. It isn't the same thing at
aU.'
Kidd followed Mrs Richards around the stripped kitchen.
"How do you know nobody was living there? There was a very nice
couple downstairs. She was Japanese. Ot Korean or something. He was
connected with the university. I didn't know them very well. They'd
only been here six months. What happened to them?" She lookedback,
just before she went into the dining room again.
"They left, just like everybody else.' He still followed.
She carried the broken things, clacking, down the rugless hall "I
think something awful happened to them. I thiRk those people down
there did something awful. Why doesn't Management send some new
guards?' She started into Bobby's room, but changed her mind and
continued to June's. "It's dangerous, it's absolutely, terribly dangerous,
. Without guards.'
"Mrs Richards?" He stood in the doorway while she circuited the
room, hands still cupped. "Ma'am? What are you looking for?'
'Someplace to throw-" she slopped-"this. But you took every·
thing upstairs already.'
"You know you could just drop it {)n the floor." He was impatient and
his impatience embarr:assed him. "I mean YOIl don't live here any more. "
After the silence in which her expression became curious, she said,
"You don't understand the way we live at aH. But then, you probably
think you understand all too well. I'm going to take this out to the in·
cinerator. "
He ducked back as she strode mrough.
"I don't like to go out in the hall. 1 don't feel safe-'
224 Dhalgren
"I'll take it out for you," he called after her.
"ThaI's all right.' Hands still together, she twisted the knob.
When the door banged behind her, he sucked his teeth, then went
and got his notebook from the window. The blue·rimmed stationery
slid half out. He opened the cover and looked at her even letters. With
his front teeth set, he took his pen and drew in the comma. Her ink
was Indian black; his, dark blue.
Going back to the living room, he stabbed at his pocket several times.
Mrs Richards came in with a look of accomplishment. His pen caught.
"Mrs Richards, do you know; that letter's still down in your mailbox?"
"What letter?"
"You've got an airmail letter in your mailbox. I saw it again this
morning."
"All the mailboxes are broken."
"Yours isn't. And there's a letter inside it. I told you about it the first
day I came here. Then I told Mr Richards a day later. Don't you have
a mailbox key?"
"Yes, of course. One of us will go down and pick it up this afternoon."
"Mrs Richards?" Something vented still left something to come.
'Yes, Kidd7"
His teeth were stiU set. He sucked air and they opened. "You're a
very nice woman. You've really tried to be nice 10 me. And I t1Hnk it's
a shame you have to be so scared all the time. There's nothing I can do
about it, but I wish there was."
She frowned; the frown passed. "I don't suppose you'd believe JUSt
how much you have done."
"By being around?"
"Yes. And also by being, well ... "
He could not interpret her shrug: "Mrs Richards, I've been scared a
whole lot of my life too. oca lot ·of things that I didn't know what they
were. But you can't just let them walk all over you-take over. You
have to_n
"lam moving!" Her head bobbed in emphasis. "We are moving from
seventeeR.-E to nineteen .. A.-
"-do something inside yourself.'
She shook hel head sharply; not looking. "And you are very pre·
sumptuous if you think you are telling me something 1 don't know.'
Now she looked up. ·Or your telling me makes it any easier."
Frustration drove the apology. "I'm sorry." He heard his own reti·
cence modify it to something else.
Mrs Richards blinked. "Oh, 1 know you're just trying to ... I am
House of the Ax 225
sorry. But do you know how terrible it is to live inside here-" she gestured at the green walls-"with everything slipping away? And you
can hear everything that goes on in the other rooms, in the olher
apartments? I wake up at night, and walk by tke window; and I can
see lights sometimes, moving in the smoke. And when the smoke isn't
so heavy, iI's even worse, because then the lights look like horrible
things, crawliog around ... This bas got to stop, you know! Management must be having all sorts of difficulty while we're going through
this crisis. I understand that. I make allowances. But it's not as though
a bomb had fallen, or anything. If a bomb bad fallen, we'd be dead.
This is something perfectly natural. And we have to make do, don't
we, until the situation is rectified?" She leaned forward: "You don't
it is a bomb?"
14lt isn1t a bomb. I was in in Mexico, just a week or so
ago. There was nothing about a bomb in the papers; somebody gave
Ine a lift who had an LA. paper in his car. Everything's fine there. And
in Philadelphia-"
"Then you See. We just have to waiL The guards will be back. They
will get rid of all these terrible people who run around vandalizing in
the halls. We have to be patient, and be strong. Of course I'm afraid.
I'm afraid if I sit still more than five minutes I'll start to scream. But
you can't give in to it, any more than you can give in ,to them. Do you
think we should take kitchen knives and broken flower pots and run
down there and tty to scrape them out?"
"No, of course: not-n
"I'm notthat sort of person. I don't intend to become that sort. You
say I have to do something? Well. I have moved my family. Don't you
think tbat lakes a great deal of ... inner strength? I mean in this situation? I can't even let myself assess how dangerous the whole thing
really is. If! did, I wouldn't be able to move at all."
"Of course it's dangerous. But I go out. I live outside in ·it; I walk
around in it. Nothing happens to me.'
"Oh, Edna told me how you got that scab On yotldace. Besides, you
ale a man. You are a young man. I am a middle·aged woman .•
"Bul thats aU there is now; Mrs Richards. You've got to walk around
in it because there iso't anything else.'
"It will be different if I wait. I know (hat because I am middle-aged.
You doo't because you're still very young.'
"Your friend Mrs Brown-"
"Mrs Brown is not me. I am not Mrs Brown. Oh, are you just trying
not to understand?»
226 Dhalgren
He gathered breath for protest but failed articulation.
"I have a family. It's very important to me. Mrs Brown is all alone,
now. She doesn't have the same sort of responsibilities. But you don't
understand about that; perhaps in your head, you do. But not inside,
not really."
"Then why don't you and Mr Richards take your family out of all
this mess?"
Her hands, moving slowly down her dress, turned up once, then
fell "One can retreat, yes. I suppose that's what I'm doing by moving.
But you can' t just give up entirely. run away. surrender. Ilih. the Uibry
Apartments." Her hands pulled together to crush the lap of her dress.
"I like it here. We've lived here since I was pregnant with Bobby. We
had to wait almost a year to get in. Before that, we had a tiny house out
in Helmsford; but it wasn't as nice as this, believe me. They don't let
just anyone in here. With Arthur's pOSition, it's much better for him.
I've entertained many of his business associates here. I especially liked
some of the younger, brighter men. And their wives. They were very
pleasant. Do you know how hard it is to make a home?"
His bare heel had begnn to sting, just from the weight of standing.
He rocked a little.
"That's something that a woman does from inside herself. You do it
in face of a11sorts of opposition. Husbands are very appreciative
when it works out well. But they're not that anxious to help. It's understandable. They don't kllow how. The children never appreciate it.
But it's terribly necessary. You must make it your own world. And
everyone must be able to feel it. I want a home, here, that looks like
my home, feels like my home, is a place where my family can be safe,
where my friends-psychologists, engineers, ordinary people _ ..
poets-can feel comfortable. Do you see?"
He nodded.
He rocked.
"That man Calkins, the one who runs the Times, do you think he
has a home? They're always writing articles about the people who're
staying with him, visitillg with him, those people hel; decided are important. Do you think I'd want a place like that? Oh, no. This is a real
home, a place where real things happen, to real people. You feel that
way. I know you do. You've become practically part of the family. You
are sensitive, a poet; you understand that to tear it all apart, and set it
up again, even on the nineteenth floor: that's taking a desperate chance,
you see? But I'm doing it. To you, moving Ilke this is just a gesture. But
House of the Ax 227
you don't understand how important a gesture can be. I cannot have a
home where I hear the neighbors shrieking. I cannot. Because when
the neighbors are shrieking, I cannot maintain the peace of mind necessary for me to make a home. Not when that is going on. Why do you
think we moved into the Uibry? Do you know how I thought of this
moving? As a space, a gap, a crack in which some terrible thing might
get in and destroy it, us, my home. You have to take it apart, then put
it back together. I really felt as though some dirt, or filth, or horrible
rot might get in while it was being reassembled and start a terrible
decay. But here-" onCe more she waved her hand-"1 couldn't live
here any more.»
"But if everything outside has changed-«
"Then I have to be-" she let go her skirt-"stronger inside. Yes?"
"Yeah." He was uncomfortable with the answer forced. "I guess so."
"You guess?" She breathed deeply, looking around the floor, as if for
missed fragments. "Well, I know. I know about eating, sleeping, how
it must be done if people are going to be comfortable. I have to have a
place where I can cook the foods I want; a place that looks the way I
want it to look: a place that can be a real home." Then she said: "You do
understand." She picked up another ceramic lion from the nest tables.
"I know you do."
He realized it was its twin that had shattered. "Yeah, Mrs Richards
but-"
"Mom?" June said over the sound of the opening door. She glanced
hesitandy between them. "\ thought you were going to come right back
up. Is that my shell box?" She walked to the cluster of remaining furniture. "I didn't even know we still had it in the house."
"Gee," Bobby said from the doorway. "We've almost got everything
upstairs. You want me to take the television?"
"I don't know why,· June said. "You can't get any picture on it any
IROre; just colored ·confetti. You better let Kidd take the teevee. You help
me carry tHe rug. II
"Oh, all right."
June dragged the carpet roll by one end. Bobby caught the other.
o Are you Sure the two of you can manage that?" Mrs Richards asked.
"We got it," June said.
It came up like a sagging fifteen-foot sausage between them. They
maneuvered across the room-Mrs Richards slid the nest tables back,
Kidd pushed aside the television-June going forward and Bobby going .
backward.
228 Dhalgren
"Hey, don't back me into Ihe damn door," Bobby said.
"Bobby!· hiS mother said.
June grunted, getting the rug in a firmer grip.
"I'm sorry." Bobby hugged the rug under hiS arm, reached behind
him for the door knob. "Darn door ... Okay?"
"You got it aU right?" June asked; she looked very intense.
"Uh.huh." Bobby nodded, backing out into the hall.
lune followed him: The edge of the rug hissed by the jamb. 'Just a
second. " She shoved the door wifh her foot; and was through.
"All right, but don't push me so fast," Bobby repeated out in the
echoing corridor.
The door swung to.
"Mrs Richards, I'll take the ,television ... if you want?"
She was stepping here and there, searching.
"Yes. Oh. Certainly, the television. Though June's right; you can't
see anything on it. Ifs terrible the way you get to depend on all these
outside ,things: Fifty great empty spots during the evening when you
Wish a radio or something Were there to fID them up. But the static
would just be awful. Wait. I could take the rest of these things off the
tables, and you could carry them up. Once we get the front room rug
down, I'm going to try putting that end table beside the door to the bal·
cony. That'S what I really like up there, the balcony. When we came
here, we applied for an apartment with a balcony, but we couldn't get
it then. I'm going to split these up and put them on either side of-"
Out in the hall, June screamed: a long scream he <:ould hear empty
her of all breath. lihen she screamed again.
Mrs Richards opened her mouth without sound; one hand shook by
her head.
He dashed between the television and the tables, out Ihe door.
June, dragging one hand against the wall, backed up the hall. When
he caught her shoulder, the scream cutond she Whirled. "Bobby ... 1"
That had almost no voice at all. "I ... I didn't see the ... " Shaking her
head, she motioned down the hall.
He heard Mrs Richards behind him, and ran three more steps.
The rug lay on the floor, the last foot sagging over the sill in the
empty elevator shart. The door nudged it, went K-chunk, retreated, then
began to dose again.
"Moml Bobby, he fen in the-"
K·chunk!
"No, oh my dear God, nol"
House of the Ax 229
"I didn't see it, mom! I didn't! I thought it was the other-"
"Oh, God. Bobby, no he couldn't-"
"Mom, I didn't know! He just backed into it! I didn'tsee-"
K-chunk!
Kidd hit EXIT with both palms, vaulted down the flight, came out
on sixteen, sprinted to the end of the hall, and beat the door.
"All right, all right. What the fuck you-" Thirteen opened for
him-"banging so hard for?"
"A rope ... !" Kidd was gasping. "Or a ladder. You guys got a rope?
And a flashlight? The boy from upstairs, he just rell down the elevator
shaftl"
"Oh, wow ... !" Thirteen stepped back.
Smokey, behind hiS shoulder, opened her eyes wide.
"Come on! You guys got a light and a ladder? And a ropel"
A black woman with hair like two inches of Brillo with hints of rust
shouldered Smokey aSide, stepped around Thirteen: "Now what
fuck is going on, huh?" Around her neck hung some dozen chains,
fa1ling between her breasts between the flaps of a leather vest laced
through its half-dozen lowest holes. Her thumb hooked a wide, scuffed
belt; her wrists were knobby, the back of her hands rough. Dark skin
rounded above the belt and below the vest bottom.
"A boy just fell down the God-damn .elevator shaft!" Kidd took another breath and tried to see past the crowd that had gathered at the
door: "Will you bastards get a ladder and a rope and a light and come
ani Huh?"
·Oh, hey, man!" The black woman looked over her shoulder. "Baby!
Adam! Denny, you had that line! Bring it out here. Some kid fell down
the shaft." She turned back. "I got a light." A brown triangle of stain,
that looked permanent, crossed her two,large, front teeth. ·Come on!"
Kidd turned a·way and started back down the hall.
He heard them running behind him.
As he ducked into the stairwell, Denny:' voice separated from the
voices and footsteps around It: "Fell down the elevator! Oh, man," and
a barking laugh .• All right. All right, Dragon Lady-I'm with you."
Sudden light behind him flung his shadow before him down the
next flight. At the landing he glanced back:
The bright scales, claws, and fangs careened after him, striated and
rigid as a television image from a monster fUm suddenly halted in its
projector: It was the dragon he'd seen hiS first night in the park with
Tak. He could tell because griffin and mantiS glimmered just behind
230 Dhalgren
it, and sometimes through it. Bleached out like ghosts, the others clustered down, streaked with sidelight. IGdd ran on, heart hammering,
breath scoring his nasal roof.
He fell against the bottom door; it sagged forward. He staggered out.
The others ran behind. Harsh light layout harsh shadow, dispersing
the lobbys grey as he crossed,
"How do you get down mto the fucking basement?" He hammered
the elevator bell.
"The downstairs is locked," Thirteen said. "I tried to get in when we
first got-"
Both elevator doors rolled open.
Dragon Lady, light extinguished, swung around him into the one
with the car, wrenched away the plate above the buttoas: The plate clattered on the car floor as she did something with switches. "Okay, I got
both doors locked open."
IGdd looked back-the two other apparitions swayed forward
among the others standing-and called: "WhereS the rope?" He held
the other iamb and leaned into the breezy shaft. Girders rose by hazy
brick. "I can't See too much." Above and in the wind a voice echoed:
Oh, no! Hcl down there! He must be terribly hurt I
And another:
No, Mont, come bach. dowll there. Mom, please!
Bobby, Bobby, are you all right] Please, Bobby! Oh, dear Godl
IGdd strained to see: the vaguest suggestion .of light up in the dis.
tance-was it some upper, open door? "Mrs Richards!" His shout vaulted about the shaft. ·You get back door!"
Oh, Bobby! Kidd, is he all right? Oh, please, let him be all right.
Mom, come bach, will you?
Then lights around him moved forward, harshening the brick, the
painted steel. On the shaft wall shadows of heads swung; some grew,
some faded; new shadows grew_ .
"You see anything?" Dragon Lady asked, crowding his shoulder.
"Here." Her arm came up, hooked his. "Lean on out further if you
want."
He glanced back at her.
She said, her head to the side: "' ain't gonna let you fall, rootherfucker!"
So he hooked up his arm. "Got me?"
"Yeah."
Their elbows made a hot, comfor,table lock.
House of the Ax 231
He leaned forward, swaying into the dark. She let him slowly out.
The other lights had filled the door, flushing (he shaft with doubled
shadows.
"You see anything in there?" which was not Dragon Lady's voice but
Denny's.
The junk down there: On darkness like velvet, cigarette packages,
chewing-gum papers, cigarettes and cigarette butts, match books, envelopes and, there to one side, heaped up ... the glitter in it identified
the wrist. "Yeah, I can see him ... I think.'
Can you see where he is? Bobby? Bobby, Kidd, can you see him? Oh,
my God,he fell all that way! Oh, he must be hurt, so badly! I can't hear
him. Is ht unconscious? Oh, can't you Set where he is yet?
Momma, please come bach from there!
Behind him, Dragon Lady said with soft brutality: "Christ, I wish
that bitch would shut the fuck upl"
"Look, man," Thirooon said, behind them, "thatl; her hid down there!"
"Don't 'man' me, Thirteen," Dragon Lady said; and Kidd felt her
grip-well, not loosen so much as shift, about an inch; his shoulder
tensed. "I still wish she'd keep quieti"
"I brought the crowbar,· somebody said. "And a screwdriver. Do you
need a crowbar or a
"A(ter that fall," Dragon Lady said, "there can't be too much left of
him. He gotta be dead.'
"Shit, Dragon Lady,' Thirteen said, "his right up there!"
"I said: He's gotta be dead! You heard me?"
MomJ come: on!
Can you se. him down there? I can't see anything. I can't hear anything.
Oh, Bobby, Bobby! Can you hear your mommy? Please, Bobby!
The grip suddenly sagged; for a moment Kidd thought he was
falling- Dragon Lady, still holding, had leaned in behind him. Her
voice roared about his ears. "YOUR SON IS DEAD, LADY!» And Kidd
was pulled away. ·Come on, let's get you back.'
Thirteen, with an unbappy expressioll, shook his head.
Denny, up frollt now, gripped a length of wound clothes line.
want to get him up? You take the rope. We'l! hold you while you go
down."
Kidd took hold of the. double end, ducked his head through, and
hooked his arms over. (Griffin and Mantis flanked the door.) Thirteen,
Denny, and Dragon Lady were handing out the other end among them.
"You just hold on," Kidd said. "I'll climb down." He got onto his
232 Dhalgnm
knees at the sill, holding the edge (one rough hand lost in griffin light),
dropped one leg down, then the other. The shaft at his back was cool.
He could not tell if the wind came from above or below. He went over
the edge, had to keep away from the wall first with his knee, then with
his foot.
"You all right?" Denny asked, legs wide, fists close.
Kidd grunted, pulling on the ropes, taut around his back (pushing
something glass into his back) and taut under his arms: ·Yeah." The
slanted bar of the door mechanism slid under his bare foot. His sandal
toe scraped metal.
Swaying at either side ofthe door, the apparitions loomed, [umioous.
Once he called: ·You can lower it a little faster than that. I'm okay.'
.Sorry," which was Thirteen, catching his breath; and the rope.
His shin scraped the basement door-sill. His bare foot hit something
and slipped, in either grease or blood.
He turned, while the rope sagged around hiro, and looked at thehe had to be dead.
The shaft was momentarily silent, except for wind.
Finally Dragon u.dy called down: "You srill okay ... 7"
"Yeah." Kidd took a breath. "I'll tie the rope around hiro. You can
haul hiro up." He slipped the rope from under his arms, p"Ued it over
his head, but left it .around one shoulder; he stepped forward on the
oozy filth, stooped, and tugged a leg from where it had wedged betwee)l two blackened bumper plates.
" ... is he alive?" Thirteen called.
Kidd took another breath. "Naw." He pulled at the arm, got a grip
around the chest, which was all soft against him. His own shirt front
soaked immediately. Blood dribbled along his forearm. Standing, he
dragged the body back a step. A foot caught, pulled free; the leg fell
back against his thigh-his thigh wet, warm, to the knee. Dragging it,
limp, reaching for the rope, he thought: Is this what turns on blood
and blade freaks? He thought of Tak, he thought of George, hunted in
himself for any idle sexuality: he found it, disconcertingly, a small
warmth above the loins that, as he bared his teeth and the rope slid
through his sticky hand, went out. "Let me have another couple of
feetl" Well, he had found it before in auto wrecks, in blue plush. in
roots, in wet wood with the bark just stripped.
Rope dropped over his shoulder; the voices eighteen floors up came
again:
Oh,MomHouse of the Ax 233 Is he all right? Kidd, have you found him yet? Bobby? Bobby, can you hear me at all? Oh, Mom, you heard- Bobby, are you all right? . He got around the chest, got a clumsy knot done-like try. mg to do It WIth your hands in glue-that maybe would hold. Bobby sagged against Kiddl; knees, heavy enough to make his bare foot slide backward. "Okay!" He tugged the rope. He could see it run across the sill above him, go taut, and slow. The weight lifted from against him. A sneaker dragged across his foot against the door, and swung away again, and raised, on hiS cheek. He smeared at his face with the heel of his hand and stepped back. "Jesus .Christ ... '" frOm a girl at the doorway silenced everything but the WInd and the reverberating voice: Bobby, Bobby, please, can you hear me at all? Another boy said: "Hey, wow ... ," Then, Denny's nervous laugh: "'Oh, man, that's a mess ... !" Dragon u.dy said, "All right, I'm untying him h';e-you get that rope down to the kid." Standing .'on the bottom of the shaft, his bare heel wedged against one caked gIrder that crossed the bumper plates, Kidd stared up. For a moment he thought the elevator car descended at him. But it was a trick of light from the flanking beasts, both of whom swayed and flickered at the edge of Sight. The rope fen at him. He grabbed it with one hand, then the other. Someone pulled it; it rasped his coated palms. "Hey ... ,n It went slack again. Dragon u.dy leaned in, the rope wrapped around one fist. "You got it now?" "Yeah." Once more he shrugged it over his head, under his arms. "Got it," They tugged him up. his head reached the sill, Denny and somebody else were on theIr knees, catching him around under the armpits. The sill scraped his chin, his chest. Smokey simply put her hand over her mouth and stepped back be- hind Thirteen. Kidd crawled over, got to his feet, moved a few steps forward. The others fell back.
234 Dhalgren
"God damn!" Dragon Lady shook her head, eyes wide, and rolled
the rope against her thigh. "God ... !'
Denny. with a funny smile, stepped back, black-lined nails moving
over his chest. "Wow, you really ... " He shook back pale hair, seemed
to be considering several things to say. "You look just as bad as ... » He
glanced at the floor.
"Uh ... n Thirteen said, 'we gOt some clothes up atthe place. You
wanna look through them for something? To change into, well, thars
. . . at! right."
"Oh, yeah ... " Kidd looked down at blood, on himself, on the floor.
It didn't run. It looked like jellied paste. "Thanks." He looked atlhe
thing On the £Ioor too, while wind and the woman's voice made torrents in the shaft. "1 better get ... him upstairs."
Bobby's shirt had ripped acroSS the back. The flesh that wasn't torn
was purple.
"You could a sling, or something," Thirteen offered. "Hey, do
we got any more of that canvass stuID"
Someone he didn't recognize said: "We threw it OUl,"
Kidd sucked his teeth, stooped, got his arms under Bobby's shoulders, tugged him over. One eye, open, had burst. The face, as though
it had been made of clay, was flattened acroSs one quarter,
Thirteen, glancing up the shaft, said: "Dragon Lady. why you want
to go hollering up at her about her kid's dead?"
"Because,' Dragon Lady said, "if I was his mother, rd want to know!'
"But suppose he was still-"
"Man," Dragou Lldy said, "that ain't like getdn' dumped out II two
story Window. ThatS seventeen, eighteen flights!'
Kidd wedged his hand under the knees, stood, unsteadily. stepped
back,
"Watch it!" Denny grabbed Kidd's shoulder. "You don't want to go
down there again, now, do you?"
Kidd said: "Make the elevator go!' In his arms, the body was heavy.
not so warm, and dripped less.
"Huh?" from Dragon Lady, who was coiling up ,the rope, "Oh, yeah!'
She swung into the car, did something else to the switches above the
buttons.
Thedoo! started to close. She stopped it With her forearm. (K-chunk.)
Denny stepped back as Kidd carried Bobby inside,
"Baby. Adam, you go on up with the others, n Dragon Lady said from
the back of the car.
But Kidd, turniog to face the door as it rolled to, could not tell which
House of the Ax 235
of the people standiog behind Thirteen and Smokey she addressed:
their light shields had been extingUished.
A moment into darkness, he heard Bragan Lady's hand move
among her chains; aud the car filled with light. "So you can see what
you're doing," the dragon said. "Here, I'll push the floor. Which one?
Seventeen?lI
'Yeah,' He nodded, stepped aside.
The car rose.
The dragon beside him, he realized, was bigger than the elevator .
Since it was light, he would have expected walls and ceiling to cut oIT
that side claw, the top of that head. The efTect, however, was that those
places in the blue, enameled walls and ceiling seemed transparent, and
the claw and the head shone through. The apparition was reflected on
four sides.
Standiog there, shifting the weight in his arms-Kidd had to shift
it several times-he noticed the Striations, like a muzzy image on some
vertical television screen, raced to the left if he swayed right; if he
swayed left, they raced right. Kidd said: "I don't think you should get
out with me. '"
The dragon said: "I wasn't planning to."
He shifted the Weight again, looked down at it, and thought: It
smells ... it has a specific smell.. And there was an annoying piece of
paper-he glanced down over the knees; was it a match book?-stuck
to his hare foot.
Why. Kidd thought, why am 1 standing here with this armful of
heavy. heavy meat, filthy with blood ... ? Then something raked inside his face; his throat clamped, his eyes teared. Either fear or grief, it
exlinguished as quickly as the lust that had momentarily raked inside
his 10iDs.
He blinked, again shifted his weight to the sandaled foot. The bare
one stuck to the floor.
Beside him the swayings and motions that might tell him Dragon
Lady's thoughts were hidden In light.
He shifted back the other way. His sandal stuck too.
. The car slowed; the door opened.
Mrs Richards' fist rose to strike her chin. The gesture was a stronger
version oUunes.
Mrs Richards stepped back, and back again.
June caught her mothers arm.
Mrs Richards closed her mouth and her eyes and began to shake.
High brittle sobs suddenly crackled the silence.
236 Dhalgren
"You better take your mother upstairs," Kidd said and stepped, after
his grotesque shadow; into the hall.
Junes head whipped back and forth between him and her mother,
till an edge of shadow swept over his. It was not him she was staring
at, but the bright apparition in the dosing elevator.
"I'll put him in the old apartment."
"Bobby's ... 1" June whispered, and smashed back against the wall
to avoid him as he passed.
'Yeah, he's dead."
Behind him Mrs Richards' crying changed pitch.
The other elevator door, aga-inst the rolled carpet, went K-chunk,
K-chunk, K-chunk ...
He shouldered into 17 -E. Put the boy in his own ... ? Kidd walked
down the hall, turned into the bare room. One of Bobby's hands (the
one with the chain, all stained) struck and struck his shin. All he had
to do was look at what he lugged not to be sad.
He tried not to drop it on the floor, lowered it, almost fell; and
dropped it. He pulled at the bent leg; it ... hent again, at the wrong
place. So he stood up. Christ, the blood! He shook his head, and peeled his shirt from
stomach and shoulders. Starling for the door, he unbuckled his pants
and, holding them with one hand-they dropped to his thighsstepped into the hall.
Mrs Richards, standing in the middle of the hall, began to shake her
head and cry again.
He scowled and pulled his pants lip. He'd been heading for the bathroom but, exposed to her astoniShed grief, he was thrown back to the
moment of sexual response at the shaft bottom. Shit, he thought:
"Ma'am, why don't you go upstairs. There's nothing you can do. Being
here won't make you feel. .. any better. June ... 1"
June half bid behind her mother_
" •.. why don't you take her upstairs." Suddenly he didn't want to
be there at aU. "Look, I've got to go get some-something." Holding
his pants closed, he went past them into the living room, picked up his
notebook and, holding it in front of his lap, stalked out the door.
Thirteen said, "r guess she's taking it pretty rOligh, n and stepped back
to let him in.
"Shit.' Dragon Lady glanced at the ceiling.
The sound of crying, high and stifled, dripped intO the room like
something molten.
"Why don't she shut up!' Dragon Lady said.
"Look, man-I;) Thirteen started.
House of the Ax 237
"r knoW; I Somebody just asked me ifI wanted a glass of wioe.
Well I sure as shIt do. Baby? Adam? You bringing that damn wine"
"You said,' Kidd began, "you had some clothes?" .
'Oh yeah. Sure. Come on in."
Denny. who was resting a glass jug on the crook of his arm said "r
-think he wants to use the bathroom.' ' ,
"Yeah, want to wash up. Tub's a mess, but you can use it if you
want. Whats the matter?"
"Nothing." But Denny's last sentence had caused goosellesh more
than either grief or terror. "Yeah, I better wash up.·
Down the hall It don't have no fuckin' windbws. I'll get a lantern •
Thirteen lifted one from a nail in the wall. .
Kidd followed him into the john.
In the swaying lantern light, he saw a line of rust along the middle
of the tub to the drai". The enamel had naked here and there from
patches. "We had to put a fueked-up scorpion in here a couple
of mghts ba,ck-name was Pepper-and he'd put something in his arm
t have .. Pm ,him in the bathtub with his spurs on, and he
t,:,ed to kick holes m It. Lantern high in One hand, Thirteen bent and
pIcked up a screw from the tub bottom, looked at it, shrugged. "Use
any of those towels you want. We don't got no washcloths." He put the
lantern down on the back of the toilet.
. Kidd put the notebook on the seat-top, turned on the water and
pIcked up the soap: Flakes of rust had dried into it.
With a grey towel (torn) he swabbed the bottom of the tub. There
was no stopper, so he rolled it up and plugged the drain, then got in
before the water had covered the bottom.
"Do want something to drink?" a girl called through the door.
"Yeah. •
he sat, scrubbing at his face, he could hear the crying upStaIrs. He wondered if she were moving from room to room.
girl came into the bathroom with a white cup in her hands. She
wore Jeans, was heavy. and had a cheerful face that was trying to look
very serious. "Here you are. That poor boy." She bent down spilling
curly hair from her shoulder, and put the Clip On the tub edge: She had
loose, heavy breasts under a blue sweatshirt. "That must have been
awfull"
Her voice was and he thought she probably giggled a lot.
The thought of her gIgghng made him smHe. "It wasn't nice."
238 Dhalgren
"Y°haU work there. You know if you keep Per pss e 1 . d"
. Uk that I'm gonna get al eXCIte . on stanng at me e ,
She giggled. "
He leaned back in the tub. "See, 1 told you. she had to ush past
'Oh " She gestured mock frustratlOn, left- P h. "Yo
stood in the door noW. He gave a sharp, short laug au
really got yourself messed up, huh, kid?". d h "
" 11 1 uess we couldn't leave hIm own t ere.
Yeah, we .• gD came in and sat on the toilet cover, picked up "I guess not. enny
k "H kid' This yours" the noteboo. ey,. h D 's "kid" had neither capHe nodded, the mug. (Around him
ital K or extra d. Kldd gnn . ch b P k from his foot floated under the
the water ran brown. The mat °hob d "Sh,'t what is this?'
Wh h . d his mout urne. , spigot.) en e Slppe , . " t wine we got wine. "Whisky," Denny said, lookmg up. You wan d ' 1 mean ' 'd thing good an strong. But [ thought maybe you want some
ft • HiS hair swung in pale blades. a er ...
"Toots fine. H
"You write all this?"
"Yeah. Leave it alone.' h' boots He
'Oh' Quickly Denny put it on the floor between 15 la d
. . ers on his naked chest a while. Then he g nce up
rubbed two fmg . h h' 1 guess that's cause she's his and said, "She's really gomg on, u .
and ground his knuckles in the soap. "I got all that
junk off my face?" . •
"Nope. On the side, under your chin.
He lathered there. The lantern showed the gone tan.
Denn esrored. "What you got a hard-on for. "
"You; ;rawny ass hanging over the of your pa:d • "Yeah?" Denny grinned. "Be the best p,ece you ever . still lookBut when Kidd sloshed the lather off h,S face, Denny was
ing at it. "How'd your run go?" Kidd asked.
"With Nightmare?" :i::: a ruck-up." Denny shrugged. "We get nothing. Time
reall ood Next time be good too. beorewas yg . f '''K'dddranksomemore,andrubbedthe "What you guys run a ter. 1
rusty soap on his stomach.. • . '"
"You all that interested m scorplOn shlt.
House of the Ax 239
Kidd shrugged. The soap bobbed away.
Denny nodded. "You interested, you ask Dragon Uidy.·
"Not that interested." He retrieved it, pushed it between his toes.
"You ask her, she'll tell you if she thinks you wanna know. Dragon
Uidy, she likes you." Suddenly Denny stood. 'So does Nightmare. I'll
be back in a second."
Kidd took another drink, and fell to scrubbing again. His nails were
lined-ruined rim and bitten cuticle-with brown. He dunked his
head, rubbed it, lifted it; dark streaks wormed from the drippings.
"Here you go, kid.' Denny came back in with an armful of clothing
and sat down. again on the toilet. "Now we got this pair of pants; and
this pair-naw, that's pretty raunchy. 1 guess these'll fit you. Nice belt,
too. 1 dunno who left all this shit. You think there'd be a smrt in here,
you knOw."
"I thought scorpions didn't wear shirts.' Kidd stood up in the loud
water to soap his groin.
Denny glanced at him once more. "Shit, I better keep my ass out of
your way. You want a black leather vest? That'd look good on you, kid,
you know? Scorpions just wear vests, usually. You seen the one I got?"
"How old are you?ft
"Eh ... sixteen,' followed with a questioning glance.
Fifteen, Kidd decided. "I'm practically a dozen years older than you.
Stop calling me kid."
"Huh? You are?"
"Yeah. Now throw me that other towel." As he caught it, the door
crashed back. Dragon Uidy lurched in, dark face twisted, stained teeth
bared, shaking a fISt with one finger up. "Look, when you go back upStairs, you tell that bitch to cut it out, you hear? It's driviog me up the
fuOOn' wall! God damn, 1 know it's her kid, but-well, Jesus Christ,
she been whining up there a fuckin' hour!" She looked at the ceiling
and bellowed: "\ mean, go out and take a walk, lady!'
"Dragon Uidy ... ' Denny's interruption seemed to take in none of
,the scorpion's rage.
"We dragged the cocksucker up there for her! She keep it up, I'm
gonna go up there and beat the shit out of her, if you don't quiet her
down!,n
Anger and the cold air: his erection, anyway, was gone. "The walls
are thin.' He rubbed himself with the bunched towel.
"Dragon Uidy:?"
"What do you want?"
"The ... Kid was asking about the run.'
240 Dhalgren
Kidd sensed the hesitant disobedience was some acquiescence to
previous commitment. But he could not be sure whether the newly implied capital was respectful or mocking.
"Yeah?" Dragon Lady's anger was quickly exhausted.
"Look, lemme out of here and see what I can do upstairs," Kidd said.
"We'll talk about it some other time." He wished Mrs Richards would
quiet too.
·Oh, yeah. Sure. Try and shut her up, huh?" Dragon Lady backed
out again.
"You don't want the vest?" Denny still pawed in the heap.
The crying suddenly rose in pitch. Outside, Dragon 4dy said, "God
damn!"
"Yeah, I want the fucking vest." Kidd stepped from the tub, reached
down, and drained the whisky. Twin warmths of agreement and alcohol turned through hitn.
Denny, still sitting, was bent almost double, as he sorted the clothing. His belt loops tugged his jeans bolow his buttocks' crevice.
Kidd sucked his teeth again and toweled his groin. "What's she here
for, anyway?"
"Dragon Lady?" Denny glanced up, unbending.
"Yeah."
"You remember when you were here last time, Nightmare was collecting us for the Iun?" Denny shrugged and fell back to sorting. "Well,
she's bringing us back, I guess."
UOh,D
The door opened again. The girl stood there, with a plastic cup this
time. "Oho" she said. "I didn't know you were ... " That was to Denny
who didn't look up. So she said to Kidd, "Denny told me I should bring
you another glass after fifteen minUtes. Did you finish the first one?"
'You don't give a fuck whether he finished it or not," Denny said,
still bent over. "Jus.t give it to him."
"I'm finished. til
She blinked rapidly, while they exchanged mug for cup. Then, without glancing at Denny, she left. Kidd drank some more, then put the
cup ,on the tub edge. "Thanks."
Denny, still, didn't say anything, almost as though embarrassed.
In black jeans and leather vest, Kidd went into the front room.
nOh, man!" Dragon Lady was saying. "This is j.USt too much-"
The crying was louder here.
"Dragon Lady," Smokey said, tugging at the tassels of her macrame
House of the Ax 241
belt, "why do you shout things up there like thatlit ... it isn't necessary!"
"Well," Dragon Lady said, thumb hooked around hers, "if I was
making that big a fool of myself, after about an hour, I don't know as
how I wouldn't appreciate somebody telling me to cut it out-like they
meant itl"
Which Smokey seemed to think was funny; Thirteen's reaction,
was hand-thrQwing frustration. He moved, almost protecuvely, between the two women; Smokey didn't seem to mind.
. "Look," Thirteen said, with settling gestures of the palms, "if your
neIghbor, I mean your own neighbor is going through that, you're just
obliged, obliged, see, to put up with-"
Dragon Lady threw her glass. It missed Thirteen. Smokey ducked
too. "Hey, watch ... !" Thirteen shouted. Pieces of glass rocked on the
floor. Wine licked down the wall. Smokey just blinked and looked like
she didn't know whether to be amused or angry.
But Dragon Lady launched into a doubled-over laughter. "Oh, Thirteen ... Thirteen, you are so-" ChainS swung, flung back around her
neck as she stood. "You are so chicken shit!" She laughed again.
Maybe, Kidd thought, scorpions just yelled loud, laughed a lot, and
rhrew things.
"Baby!" Dragon Lady shouted. "Adam! We gonna get out of here
. ' soon ...
"Good-bye," Kidd said, at the door, and went. (The girl in the blue
sweatshirt who had brought him the whiskey was the only one who
said "good-bye.» Somehow, though, he was sure it was time to leave.)
In the hall, it occurred to him he hadn't even noticed if the sick girl
were still." her bunk or not.
5
He carried the nest tables into nineteeu-A.
Mrs Richards stoQd in the middle ·of the room.
"Urn," he said, "I thought I'd bring these, uh, up with me. Since I
was coming. You said you wanted them by the ... " then went and put
them by the balcony door.
"Your clothes," she said. "I was going to give you some of my ...
sons clothes. n
·Oh. I got these ... " They were all black, too.
Her hands gripped one another beneath her breasts. She nodded.
"Is June all right?"
242 Dhalgren
She kept nodding.
"I thought 1 heard you downstairs, but when 1 went in, you'd already
gone up."
The nodding continued till suddenly she averted her face.
"I'll go bring the rest of the stuff up, ma'am.·
He returned with rugs over each shoulder, and dumped them. Mrs
Richards was out of the room. On his next trip (he'd considered Bobby's
toys, but decided he'd better leave those down there) she passed
through and did not look at him. Three more trips and everything (toys
too: he tookthern to Bobby's room and put them in the closet right
away) was up. .' . .
He sat on the easy chair and opened hlS notebook. A rusty lme still
ringed the gnawed lozenges of his nails. He took his pen (clipped to a
buttonhole in the vest now) and turned pages. He was surprised how
few empty ones were left. He turned to ,the last and realized pages had
been torn out. Their remains feathered inside the coil. The cover was
very loose. Half a dozen of the holes in the cardboard had pulled free.
He turned back to the furthest-front free page and clicked his pen point.
Then, slowly, he lost himself in words:
Both legs were broken. His pulped skull and jellied hip . ..
He paused; he re-wrote:
Both legs broken, pulp-eyed, jelly-hipped. .. . •
Only somewhere in there his tongue balked on unwanted sttess. He
frowned for a way to remove a syllable that would give the line back
its violence. When he found it, he realized he had to give up the ed's
and reorder three WGrds; what was left was a declarative sentence that
meant something else entirely and made his back crawl under the
leather vest, because, he recognized irrelenndy, it was far more horrifying than what he had intended to describe. The first conception had
only approached the bearable limit. He took a breath, and a clause from
the first three lines, to close the passage; and, writing it, saw only one
word in it was necessary, so crossed out the others.
Mrs Richards came into the room, circled it, searching, saw him:
"You're writing. 1 didn't mean to disturb your ... writing."
"Oh, no." He closed the book. "['m finished.' He waS tired. But he
was finished.
"1 thought perhaps you were writing some sort of ... elegy. Folt . ..•
and dropped her head.
"Oh. No .. ." he said, and decided "Elegy' was the tide. "Look,
youve got everything up here. Maybe I should just go on and leave.'
House of the Ax 243
"No.· Mrs Richards' hand left her neck to reach for him. "Oh, you
mustn't go! I mean you haven't talked to Arthur about your pay, have
you?"
"Well, okay.' He sat back.
Mrs Richards, all exhausted nervousness, sat across the coffee table
from him.
He asked: "Wheres June 1'"
"She's in her ... " ended by vague gesture. She said, "It mUst be awful
for you."
"It's worse for you.' He was thinking: Her sons clothes? She couldn't
have meant Bobby, we weren't anywhere near the same size. Edward's?
"Mrs Richards, 1 can't even say how sorryl-"
She nodded again, chin striking her knuckles. 'Oh, yes. You don't
have to. 1 understand. You Went down there and brought him-» in the
pause he thought she was going to cry- "back. How can I say thank
you for that? You went down there. 1 saw you when you brought him
up. How can 1 say-" .
"It's all right, Mrs Richards. Really." He wanted to ask her about the
structure of light that had been in the elevator car with him; and could
think of no way. Momentarily he wondered, maybe she hadn't seen it.
But moved his jaws on one another to dispel those implications. "1
don't have to wait here, for Mr Richards. 1 can catch him another time.
You might want to be alone with him when ... '
The disorganized movements of her face stopped. "Oh no, I want
SOmeone here! Please stay, stay for me! That would be-" she began to
look around in the seat of her chair-"the kindest thing. You could do."
«All right." .
What she looked for, she did not find. "I want somebody with me.
I need somebody." She stood. "With me here." Again, she circled the
room. 'It's so strange, 1 haven't the faintest idea what I'll say. 1 wish 1
could phone him; on the phone it would be sO much easier. But I just
have to wait. He'll come in the door. And fll say, Arthur, this afternoon,
June backed Bobby into the elevator shaft and he fen down seventeen
flights and killed himself •.. " She looked into the kitchen, crossed the
room, looked down the hall.
"Are you sure you wouldn't feel better if I went?" He wanted to go,
could not conceive her wanting him to remain, even though she waved
her hand at him, even though she said:
"Flease. You have to stay.'
"Yes, ma'am. 1 win. n
244 Dha!gren
She Came back to her chair. "It doesn't feel like we live here. The
walls are blue. Before they were green. But aU our furniture, it's aH in
the proper place.'
"The rugs aren't down yet," he suggested. Well, it filled the silence.
"Oh, no. No, I don't think it's the rugs. It's the feeling. It's the feeling of trying to make a home. A home for my husband and my ... '
Then she pressed her lips together and dropped her head.
"Look, Mrs Richards, why don't you go in and lie down or something till Mr Richards gets back? I'll put the rugs down," and thought
. abruptly: That's what she wanted me to say; so I'll have to tell him!
Who told the damn kids to take the rugs up anyway? And couldn't
remember whether it was him <" her.
But she shook her head. "I couldn't sleep now. No. When Arthur
COmes back ... no." The last was calm. She put-pushed her hands
into her lap. Bobbys pile of books still sat in the COrner ... Kidd wished
he had put them away.
She stood.
She walked the rOom once more.
Her motions began definitively but lost focus in a glance-first out
the balcony doors, next into the dining room, now toward the hall.
She stopped beside ber chair.
"Arthul;' she said, followed by what sounded more like a comma of
address than of apposition, "hes outside."
UMa'am?"
"Arthur is outside, in that." She sat. "He goes out every day. I can
watch him from the window turn down Forty-Fourth there and disappear. Into the smoke. Like that." Outside the balcony door, buildings
were blurred. "We've moved." She watched the fog for the length of
five breaths. "This building, its like a chessboard. Now we occupy a
different square. We had to move. We had to. Our pOsition before was
terrible." Smoke pulled from the window, uncovering more smoke-
"But I didn't know the move would cost so much."-and more. "I am
not prepared for this. I'm really not. Arthur goes out there, every day,
and works in Systems. Maitland Systems Engineering. Then he comes
home.· She leaned forward. "Do you know, I don't believe all that out
there is real. Once the smoke covers rum, I don't believe he goes anywhere. I don't believe there's anyplace to go." She sat back. "I.don't
think I believe there ever was. I'm very much in love with that man.
And I'm very much in awe of him. It frightens me how much I don't
understand rum. I often suspect that he isn't happy, that going out to
House: of the Ax 245
\VDrk everyday in that-" she shook her head slightly-"that it doesn't
give him anything real, the inner things he needs. Whatever it is he
does out there, it frightens me. I picture ltim going to a great empty
building, filled with offices, and desks, and work benches, and technician shops, and drafting tables, and filing cabinets, and equipment
closets-no people. He walks up and down, and looks into the open
()ffice doors. I don't think he opens the closed Ones. Sometimes he
straightens a pile of papers on somebodys desk. Sometimes he looks
through a pile o£,circuit plans, but he puts them back, neatly. That's all .
Ml day. With no one else there. Do you think any of the windows are
broken? Do you think he sometimes turns on a light switch and only
one of those long fluorescent tubes flickers, faintly orange at one end?
Theres something wondenul about engineering, you know. I mean,
you go in and you solve problems, you make things, with your hands,
with your mind. You go in, and you have a problem to work with, and
when you've finished solving it, you've ... well, done something with
real, tangible results. Like a farmer Who raises a crop; you can see that
ilsthere. You don't just push a button, again and again, or put endless
piles of paper in the proper drawers. Engineers are very wise. Like
farmers. They can also be very dense and stubborn. Oh, I don't know
what's out there, what he goes to do every day. He won't talk about it.
He used to. But not now. I don't know where he goes, every morning.
If be walked around the streets all day, I could tell that. Thaes not it.
But whatever it is, it isn't good for him. He's a good man. He's more
thana good man; he's an intelligent man. Do you know he was hired
right out of his dass in college? Oh, they were doing that a lot a rew
years ago. But it wasn't as common as all that when we were in school.
He needs ... something-I'd seem like a sllly woman if I said 'worthy
of him.' But thats what I mean. I've never understood what was out
there.' She looked again through the balcony doors. "I've suspected,
oh, I've suspected that whatever was there wasn't really what he needed, what would make him-happy? Oh, I learned a long time ago you
don't look for that. But the thing you do try for-e:xcellence? Contentment? Oh no, oh no: not in a great empty office building, where
the lights don't work, where ·the windows are broken, where there
aren't any people.'
"There're probably people there,' Kidd said uncomfortably. "Probably a skeleton staff. Madame Brown and I were talking about that. It's
probably like at ... the Management office.'
"Ah.» Her hands met in her lap. "Yes." She sat back. "But I'm only
246 Dhalgr""
telliRg you how it feels. To me. When Ihe smoke thins, I can look across
altheother buildings. So many of the windows are broken. Maybe the
maintenance men in Arthur's ollice have already staTted putting in new
panes. The maintenance is always hetter in a place of business. Well,
therels more money involved. I just wonder when we can expect some
sort of reasonable return to normal here. There's a certain minimum
standard that must be kept up. They should send somebody around, if
only to let us know what the situation is. Not knOwing, the worst.
If I did know something, something for sure about plans for repairing
the damages, for restoring· service, ligbts, and things, when we could
expect them to start ... " She looked oddly annoyed.
"Maybe they will,' he suggested, "send somebody around.'
"You'd ,think they would. We have had uouble with them before;
there was a huge crack, it opened up in June's Ceiling. It wasn't our
fault. Sometlring upstairs leaked. It took them three months to send
somebody. But they.answered my letter right away. Meanwhile, I just
have to muddle, muddle on. And every morning I send Arthur out of
here,out into that." She nodded, "Thafs the crime. Of course I couldn't
keep him back; he wouldn't stay. I'd tell him how dangerolls I thought
it was out there, all the awful things I'm afraid might happen, and
he'd-Qh, I wisb he'd laugh. But he wouldn't. He'd scowl:And go. He
goes away, every morning, just disappears, down Forty-Fourth. The
only thing I can do for him is try and keep a good home, where notbing Can hurt him, at least here, a happy, safe, and-"
He thought she'd seen somethiRg behind him, and was about to turn
around, But her expression went on to something more violent than
recognition.
She bent her head. "I guess I haven't done that very well. I haven't
done that at all."
He wished she would let him leave.
"Mrs Richards, I'm going to see about that stllff in the back." He
thought there was some stllif in the back still to he pllt in place. 'You
just try and take it easy now.' He got lip, thinking: When I come back
I can pllt down the living-room rug.
There's nothing I can do, he justified, to sponge lip her grief. And I
can't do nOlhing.
He opened the door to Bobby's room where the furniture had still
not been put against the walls.
AndJllne's fIsts crashed the edges of the pOster together.
"Hey, I'm sorry ... I didn't realize this was your-" But it was
House of the Ax 24-7
Bobby's room. Kidds apologetic smile dropped before her astounded
despair. "Look, I'll leave you alone ... "
"He was going to teIII" she whispered, wide.eyed, shaking her head.
"He said so! Butl swear," and she crusbed the poster altogether now.
"I swear I didn't do it on purpose ... !"
After a few moments, he said, "[ suppose .thafs the frrst thing that
would have occurred to anybody else in his right mind. But I didn't
even think of it till just now." Then-and was afraid-he backed out
of the room and closed the door, unable to determine what had formed
iR her face. I'm JUSt an observer, he thought, and, thinking it, felt the
,thought crumple like George's poster between Junes fists.
Walking toward the living room, he envisioned her leaping from the
door, to bite and rake his back. The doors stayed closed. There was no
sound. And he didn't want to go back to the living room.
Just as he came in, the lock ratcheted, and the hall door pushed
open. "Hello, guess who 1 found on the way up here?"
"Hi, Mary." Madame Brown followed Mr Richards in.
"Honey, what in the world is that mess down in the lobby? It looks
as though somebody-'
Mrs Richards turned around on the couch.
Mr Richards frowned.
Madame Brown, behind him, suddenly touched ber hand to her
bright, jeweled chains.
Mrs Richards squeezed the fabric of her skirt. "Arthur, this afternoon Bobby ... June-Jlobby-!n
His eyelids snapped wide enough to pain the sockets. He rolled, scrabblingon snarled blankets and crushed leaves, flung his hands at her
naked back. Had he nails, he would have torn.
"Unnnh," Uinya said and tIlrned to him. Then, "Hey-" because he
dragged her against him. "I know," she mumbled beside his ear, moving her arms inside his to get them free, "you want to he a great and
famous-"
His arms shook.
"Oh, hey-!' Her hands came up across his back, tightened. 'You
were having bad dreams! A:bout that boyl'
He shook his head beside hers.
"Its all rigbt,' she whispered. She got one hand high enough to rub
the back of his shoulder. "Irs all right now. You're awake." He took
248 Dhalgren
three rough breaths, with stomach-clenched silences between, then let
go and rolled to his back. The red veil, between him and the darkness,
here, then there, fell away.
She touched his arm; she kneaded his shoulder. "It was a really bad
dream, wasn't it?"
Hesaid, "I don't. .. know," and stopped gasping. Foliage hung OVer
them. Near the horizon, blurred in fog, he saw a tiny moon; and further away; another! His head came up from the blanket-went slowly
back:
They were two parklights which, through smoke, looked like diffuse pearls. "I can't remember if 1 was dreaming or not."
"You were dreaming about Bobby." she said. "That's all. And you
scared yourself awake."
He shook his head. "I shouldn't have given her that damned
poster-"
Her head fell against his shoulder. "You didn't have any way to know
... " Her hand dropped over his chest; her thigh crossed his thigh.
"But-· he took her hand in his- "the funny lack of expression Mr
Richards got when she was trying to tell him how it happened. And in
the middle of it,June came in, and sort oredged into the waH, and kept
on brushing at her chin with )ler fist and blinking. And Mrs Richards
kept ,on saying, 'It was an accident! It was a terrible accident!' and
Madame Brownjustsaid 'Oh, Lord!' a couple of times, and Mr Richards
didn't say anything. He just kept looking back and forth between Mrs
Richards and June as though he couldn't quite figure out what they
were saying, what they'd done, what had happened, until June started
to cry and ran out of the room-"
"It sounds awful," she said. "But try to think about something e1se--"
"I am." He glanced at the parklights again; now there was only one.
Had the other gone out? Or had some tree branch, lifted away bywind,
settled back before it. "About what George and you were saying yesterday-about everybody being afraid of female sexuality. and trying
to make it into something that wreaks death and destruction all about
it. I mean, 1 don't know what Mr Richards would do if he found out his
sunshine girl was running around streets like. bitch in heat, lusting to be brutalized by Some hulking, buck nigger. Lefs see,
hes already driven one child out of the house with threats of murder-·
"Oh, Kiddl no ... "
"--and the sounds that come out of that apartment when they don't
think anybodys listerung are just as strange as the ones that come up
House of the Ax 249
from Thirteen's, believe me. Maybe shes got good reason not to want
ber old man to know, and if Bobby was threatening, in that vicious way
younger brothers can have,to show the poster to her parents, well
maybe just for an instant, when she was backing him down the hall,
IUld the door rolled open, from Some Sort of half-conscious impulse, it
WlIS easier to shove-or not even to shove, but just not say anything
when he stepped back toward the wrong-»
"Kicl,71 Lanya said, "now come on!"
"It would be just like the myth: her lust for George, death and destruction! Only-only suppose it was an accident?" He took another
breath. "That!; what frightens me. Suppose it was, like she said,just an
accident. She didn't see at all. Bobby just backed into the wrong shaft
door. 'Ihat's what terrifies me. Thats the thing I'm scared of most.»
"Why ... !» Lanya asked.
"Because ... " He breathed, felt her head shift on his shoulder, her
hand rock with his on his chest. "Because that means it's the city. That
means it's the landscape: the bricks, and the girders, and the faulty
wiriog and the shot elevator machinery. all conspiring together to make
these myths true. And that's crazy.» He shook his head. "I shouldn't
have given her that poster. I shouldn't. I really shouldn' t-" His head
stopped shaking. "Motherfucker still hasn't paid me my money. I was
going to talk to him about it this evening. But 1 couldn't, then."
"No, it doesn't sound like the most propitious time to bring up financial matters. tt
"I just wanted to get out of there."
She nodded.
. "I don't want the money. I really don't.»
"Good. n She hugged. "Then just forget about the whole thing. Don't
go back there. Let them alone. If people are busy living out myths you
don't like, leave them to it."
He raised his band above his face, palm up, moving his fingers,
watching them, black against four-fifths black, his arm muscle tiring,
till he let his knuckles rail against his forehead. "\ was so scared ...
When I woke up, I was so scaredl»
"It was just a dream," she insisted. And then: "Look, if it really was
an accident, your bringing that poster didn't have anything to do with
it. And if she did do it on purpose, then shes so far gone there's no way
you could possibly blame yourself! n
"\ know,· he said. "But do you think . .. " He could feel the place on
his neck her breath brushed warmly. "Do you think a city can control
250 Dhalgrrn
the way the people live inside it? 1 mean, just the geography, the way
the streets ate laid out, the way the buildings are placed?"
"Of course it does,» she said. "San Francisco and Rome are both built
on hills. I've spent time in both and I'm sure the amount of energy you
have to spend to get from one place to the other in either city has more
to do with the tenor of life in each one than whoever happens to be
mayor. New York and Istanbul are both cut through by large bodies of
water, and even out of Sight of it, the feel on the streets in either is more
alike than either one is to, say. Pa·ris or Munich, which are only crossed
by swimmable rivers. And London, whose river is an entirely different
width, has a different feel entirely.' She waited.
So at last he said. "Yeah ... But thinking that live streets and windows are plotting and conniving to make you into something you're
not, that's crazy; isn1t it?"
wYesl D .she said, "that's crazy-in a word. ..
He slid his arm. around her and could smell her wake-up breath,
cuddling her. "You know, when I pulled him out, blood aR "ver me,
like a flayed carcass all a butcher hook ... you know,l had half a hardon? That!; too much, huh?"
She reached between his legs. "You stiH do." She moved her fingers
there; he moved in her fingets.
"Maybe thatS what 1 was dreaming about?" He laughed sharply. "00
you think thaI's what I was-?"
Her hand contracted, released, moved forward, moved back.
He said: "I don't think that's going to do any good ... "
Against his chest he felt her shrug. "Try."
Not so much to his surprise, but somehow against his will, his will
ceased, and it did.
I let my head fall back in this angry season. There, tensions I had
hoped would resolve, merely shift with the body!; machinery. The act
is clumsy. halting, and without grace or reasOn. What can I read in the
smell of her, what message ia the code of her breath? This mountain
opens passages oflight. Th. lines on squeezed lids cage the bursting
balls. All efforts, dying here, coalesce in the blockage of ear and throat,
to an a-colp<)ral lucence, a patterning released from pleasure, the retained shadow of pure idea.
The leaf shattered in his blunt fj.ngets: leaf and flesh-he ground the
flakings with his roughened thumb-were the Same color, a different
texture. He stared, defining the distinction.
House of the Ax 251
"Come on." unya caught up his hand.
Flakes fluttered away Csome he felt cling); notebook under his arm,
hestood up from where he'd beeR leaning on the other end of the picnic table. "I was just thinking," Kidd said, "maybe 1 should stop off at
the Labtys and try to collect my money."
"And keep MrNewboywaiting?" Lanya asked. "Look, you said you
got them all moved!"
"I was just thinking about it,' Kidd said. "That's all." .
A young man with a high, bald forehead and side hair to bis naked
shoulders sat on an overturned wire basket, one sandal resting over the
other. He leaned forward, a burned twig in each hand. They had
smudged his fingers. "I take these from you crossed,' he said to a girl
sitting Indian fashion on the ground before him, "and give them to you
crossed."
The girfs black hair was pulled back lacquer tight, till, at {he thong
whipped a dozen times around her pony tail and tied, it broke into a
dOzen rivuletS about the collar of her pink her sleeves were torn
off; frayed pink threads lay against her Ihin arms. With her own
smudged fingers, she took the twigs. "I take these from you-' she hesitated. concentrated-"uncrossed and 1 give them to you-" she thrust
them back-·uncrossed?" '
Some spectators in tbe circle laughed. Others looked as bemused as
she did.
"Nope. Got it wrong again." The man spread his feet, sandal heels
lining the dirt, and drew them back against the basket rim. "Now
watch." With crossed wristS he took the sticks from her: "1 take these
from you ... uncrossed-" his wristS came apart--"and I give them
back to you ... "
John, scratching under the fringed shoulder of his Peruvian vest
with one hand and eating a piece of bread with the other, came
around the furnace. "You guys want some more?" He gestured with
the slice, chewing. "Just go take it. Yo,. didn' { get here till we were
already halfway thlough breakfast." Gold-streaked h".and gold wire
frames set off his tenacious tan; his pupils were like circles cut from
the overcast.
Kidd said: "We had enough. Really."
In tbe basket on which the bald man sat C"l take these from you uncrossed and 1 give them to you ... crossed!' More laughter) a half
dozen loaves of bland, saltless bread had been bro,.ght over by two
scorpions who had taken back two cardboard cartons of canned food,
in exchange.
252 Dhalgr£ll
Kidd said: "You're sure todays paper?" which was the third
time he'd askedJohn ,that over the last hour.
"Sure I'm sure.' John picked the paper up off the picnic table. "Tuesday, May 5th-that's May-day, isn't it?-·1904. Faust brought it by this
morning." He folded it back, began to beat it against his thigh.
"Tell Milly when she gets back thanks again for the clean shirt."
Lanya tucked one side of the rough-dried blue cotton under her belt.
"I'll bring it back later this afternoon."
"I will. 1 think MillyS laundry project-" John mused, beating, munching-"is one of,the most successful we've investigated. Don't you?"
Lanya nodded, still tucking.
"Come on," Kidd said. "Lets get going. 1 mean if this is really Tuesday. You're sure he said Tuesday now?"
"JIm sure J" Lanya sai.d.
("Nope, you're stiU doing it Wrong, now watch: 1 take them from
you crossed and I give them to you uncrossed.» His fingers smudged
to the second knuckle and bunched at the base of the charred batons,
came forward. Hers, smeared equally, hesitated, went back ,[0 fiddle
withone another, started,[O take them again. She said: "I just don't get
it. 1 don't get it at all." Fewer laughed tbis time.)
"So long," Kidd said to John, who nodded, his mouth full.
They made their way through the knapsacks.
"That was nice of them to feed us ... again," he said. "They're not
bad kids." .
"They're nice kids." She brushed at her clean, wrinkled front. "Wish
I had an iron."
"You really have to get dressed up to go visit Calkins' place, huh?"
Lanya glanced appraisingly at his new black jeans, his black leather
vest. 'Well, you're practically in uniform already. I, unlike you, however, am not at my best when scruffy."
They made their way toward the park entrance.
"Whats the laundry project?" he asked. "Do they have some place
where they pound the clothes with paddles on a rock?"
"I think, » LanY" said, "Milly andJommy and Wally and Whats-hername-with-all-the-lndian-silver found a laundromat or somethiog a
few days ago. Only the power's off. Today they've gone off to find the
nearest three-pronged outlet that works."
"Then when did the one you have on get done?"
"Milly and I washed a whole bunch by band in the ladies' john yesterday, while you were at work."
House of the Ax 253
"Oh. It
"Recording engineer to laundress," LanY" mused as they passed
through the lion gate, "in less than a year.· She humphed. "If you asked
him, I suspect John would tell you thats progress.·
"The paper says it's Tuesday." Kidd moved his thumb absently
against the blade of his orchid he'd hooked through a side belt loop;
inside it, the chain harness jingled, each step. "He said come up when
the paper said it was Tuesday. You don't think hes forgotten?"
"If he has, we'll remind him,D Lanya said. "No, JIm sure he hasn't
forgotten."
He could press his thumb or his knuckles against the sharp edges
and leave only the Slightest line, that later, like the other cross-hatches
in the surface skin, would fill with dirt; but he could hardly feel it.
"Maybe we'll avoid any with scorpions today." he said as they
crossed from Brisbain North to Brisbain South. "If we're lucky."
"No seIf-respecting scorpion would be up at ,this hour of the mornmg," Lanya said. "They all sleep till three or four, then carouse till
dawn, didn't you know?n
·Sounds like the life. You been in Calkins' place before, you keep
telling me. It'll be okay?"
"If I hadn't been in there before-" she slapped her harmonica on
her palm-HI wouldn't be making this fuss." Three glistening notes.
She frowned, and blew again.
"I think you look pretty good scruffy,· he said.
She played more notes, welding them nearly into melody, till she
changed her mind, laughed, or complained, or was silent, before beginning another. They walked, Lanya strewing incomplete tunes.
His notebook flapped his hip. (His other hand was petaled in steel,
now.) He swung, in twin protections, from the curb. "I wonder if I'm
scared of what hel; going to say."
Between notes: "Hmm?D
"Mr Newboy. About my poems. Shit, I'm not going to see him. I want
to see where Calkins lives. I don't care what Mr Newboy says about
what I write."
"I left three perfectly beautiful dresses there, upstairs in Phil's closet. I wonder if they're slm there."
"Probably. if Phil is."
"Christ, no. Phil hasn't been in the city for ... week\;!"
The air was tingly and industrial. He looked up on a sky here the color
of clay. there the color of ivory, lighter OVer there like tarnished tin.
254 Dhalgren
"Good idea," unya said, "Cor me to split. I got you." Slipping her
hand between blades, she grasped two of his fingets. Even on her thin
wrist, turned, me blades preSsed, rubbed, creased her skin-'-
out. You're gonna .. . m
But she didn't.
Over the wall hung hanks oC ivy.
At the brass gate, she said, "It's quiet inside."
"Do you ring?" he asked, "or do you shout?" Then he shouted: "Mr
Newboy!"
She pulled her hand gingerly away. "There used to be a beli, I think
... " She fingered the stone around the brass plate.
"Hello ... " from inside. Footsteps ground the gravel somewhere behind the pines.
«Helio, sir!" Kidd called, pulling the orchid alI, pushing a blade into
a belt-loop.
Ernest N ewboy walked out of shaggy greeR. "Yes, it is l'uesday. isn't
it." He gestured with a rolled paper. "I just CoundouthalC an hour ago."
He did something on the inside of the latch plate. The gate clanked,
swung in a little. "Glad to see YOIl both.' He pulled it open the rest oC
the way.
"Isn't the man who used to be a guard here anymore?" bnya asked,
stepping through. "He had to stay in there all the time.' She pointed
to a small, green booth, out oC sight of the sidewalk.
"Tony?" Mr Newboy said. "Oh, he doesn't go on till sometime late
in the aCternoon. But practically everybody's out today. Roger decided
to take them on a tour."
"And you stayed for us?" Kidd asked. "You didn't have to-"
"No, I just wasn't up to it. r wouldn't have gone anyway."
"Tony ... ' unya mulled, looking at the weathered paint on the gate
shed. "I thought his name was something Scandinaviaa"
"Then it must be somebody else now," Mr Newboy said. He put his
hands in his pockets. "Tony's quite as Italian as you can get. He's really very nice. •
"So was the other one," unya said. "Things are always changing
around here. It
"Yes, they.are. 1t
They started up ,the path. ,
"There's so many people in and out ·of here all the time I've given
House of the Ax 255
up trying to keep track. It's very hectic. But you've picked a quiet day.
Roger has taken everyone downtown to see the paper office." Newboy
smiled. "Except me. I always insist on sleeping late Tuesdays."
"Its nice to see the place again," unya consented. "When will
everybody be back?"
"I would imagine as soon as it gets dark. You said you'd stayed here
before. Would you like to wait and say hello to Roger?"
"No," unya said. "No. I was just curious."
Mr Newboy laughed. "I see."
The gravel (chewing Kid's callused Coot) turned between two whitecolumned mock temples. The trees gave way to hedges; and what
might have been an orchard furthe •.
"Can we cut across the garden?"
"Of course. We'll go to the side terrace. The colIee urn's still hot I
know, and I'll see if I can find some tea cakes. Roger keeps telling me
I have the run of the place, but I still feel a little strange prying into
Mrs Alt's kitchen just like that-"
"Oh, thats-" and 'You don't have-" Kidd and unya began together.
"No, I know where they are. And its time formy coffee break-that's
what you call it here?"
"You'll love thesef" unya exclaimed as they stepped through the
high hedge. "Roger has the most beautiful nowets and-"
Brambles coiled the trellis. Dried tendrils curled on splintered lathe.
The ground was gouged up in black confusion here, and here, and
thete.
"-What in the world ... ' unya began. "What happened?"
Mr Newboy looked puzzled. "r didn't know anything had. Irs been
like this since: I've been here."
"But it was full of flowers: those sun-colored orange things, like
tigets. And irises. Lots of irise.s-"
Kidds foot cooled in moist ground.
"Really?" Newboyasked. "How long ago were you here?"
unyashrugged. "Weeks ... three weeks, four?"
"How strange. • Mr Newboy shook his head as they crossed the littered earth. "I'd always gotten the impression they'd been like this, for
yean; . . . "
In a ten-foot dish of stone, leaves .otted in puddles.
unya's head shook. "The fountain used to be going all the time. It
had a Perseus, or a Hermes or something in it. Where did it get to?"
256 Dhalgrm
"Dear me,' Newboy squinted. "I think in a pUe of junk behind
the secretary cottage. 1 saw something like that when 1 was wandering
around. But 1 never knew it had anything to do with the fountain. 1
wonder who's been around here long enough to know?"
"Why don't you ask Mr Calkins?" Kidd said.
'Oh, no. 1 don'tthink 1 would do that." MrNewboy looked at unya
with bright complicity. "I don't thinkl would do that at all."
"NO," said unya, face fallen before the desolation, "I don't think
50.f!
At the brims crack, the ground, oozy under thin grass, kept their
prints like plaster.
They passed another vined fence; a deal of lawn, and, higher than
the few full trees, the house. (On a rise off to one side was another
house, only three floors. The secretary cottage?)
Set in the grass a verdigrised plate read:
MAY
From the five fat, stone towers-he sought a sixth for symmetry and
failed to fmd it looked as though a modern buHding of dark wood,
glass, and brick had been built around an old one of stone.
"How many people does he have here?· Kidd asked.
"I don't really know,' Mr Newboy said. They reached the terrace
Bag. "At least fifteen. Maybe twenty-five. The people he has for help,
they're always changing. I reaUy don't see how he gets anything done
for looking after them. Unless Mrs Alt does aU that." They climbed the
concrete steps to the terrace.
"Wouldn't you lose fifteen people in there?" Kidd asked.
The house, here, was glass: inside were maple wall panels, tall brass
lamps, bronze statuary on small end tables between long couches covered in gold velvet, all wiped across with flakes of glare.
"Oh, you never feel the place is crowded."
They passed another window-wall; Kidd could see two walls covered with books. Dark beatns inside held up a balcony, flanked with
chairs of gold and green brocade; silver candlesticks-one near. one
far off in shadow-bloomed on white doilies floating on the mahogany
river of a dining table. "Sometimes I've walked around thinking I was
perfectly alone for an hour or so only to come across a party of ten in
one of the other rooms. I suppose if the place had a full staff-" dried
leaves shattered underfoot-"it wouldn't be SO lonely. Here we are."
House of the Ax 257
Wooden chairs with colored canvas webbing sat around the terrace.
Beyond the balustrade the rocks Were licked over with moss and
lopped by birches. maples and, here and there, thick oaks.
"You sit down. I'll be right back.'
Kidd sat-the chair was lower and deeper than he thought-and
pulled his notebook into his lap. The glass doors swung behind Newboy. Kidd turned. "What are you looking at?"
"The November garden." Arms crossed, unya leaned on the stone
rail. "You can't see the plaque from here. It's on top of that rock. •
in the ... November garden?'
She shrugged a "nothing." "The first night I got here there was a
party going on there: November, October, and December.'
"How many gardens does he have?'
"How many months are there?"
'What about the garden we first came through?"
"That one,' she glanced back, "doesn't have a name." She looked
again at the rocks. "It was a marvelous party, with colored lights strung
up. And a band: violins, flutes, and somebody playing a harp."
"Where did he get violins here in Bellona?'
"He did. And people with lots and lots of gorgeous clothes."
Kidd was going to say something about Phil.
unya turned. "If my dresses are stUl here, I know exactly where
they'd be."
Mr Newboy pushed through the glass doors with a teawagon. Urn
and cups rattled twice as the tires crossed the sill. The lower tray held
dishes of pastry. "You caught Mrs Alt right after a day of baking.'
"Hey,' Kidd said. "Those look good."
"Help yourself.» He poured steaming coffee intO blue porcelain.
"Sugar, cream?"'
Kidd shook his head; the cup warmed his knee. He bit. Cookie
crumbs rell and rolled on his notebook.
unya, sitting on the wall and swinging her tennis shoes against the
stone, munched a crisp cone filled with butter-cream.
"Now,' Mr Newboy said. "Have you brought some poems?'
"Oh.· Kidd brushed crumbs away. "Yeah. But they're handwritten.
1 don't have any typewriter. I print them out neat, after I work on
them."
"I can probably decipher good rair copy.'
Kidd looked at the notebook, at unya, at Mr Newboy, at the notebook. "Here."
258 DhaZgren
Mr Newboy settled back in his seat and turned through pages .• Ah.
I see your poems are all onlhe left."
Kidd held his cup up. The <oolIee steamed his lips.
·So .. . " Mr Newboy smiled into the book, and paused. "You have
received that holy and spectacular wound which bleeds .. . well, poetry." He turned another page, paused to look at it not quite long enough
(in Kidd's estimate) to read it. "But have you hunkered down close to
it, sighted through the lips of it the juncture of your own humaruty
with thatoIthe race?"
"Sir . .. ?ft
"Whether love or rage," Mr Newboy went on, not looking up, "or
detachment impels the sighting, no matter. If you don't do it, all your
blood is spilled pointlessly . . . Ah, 1 suppose I am merely trying to
reinvest with meaning what is inadequately referred to in art as Universality. It is an inadequate reference, you know." He shook his head
and turned another.page. "There's no reason why all art should appeal
to all people_ Blit every editor and entrepreneur, deep in his heart of
hearts is sure it does, wants it to, wishes it would. In the bar, you
asked about publication?" He looked up, brightly.
"That's right," Kiddsaid with reserve and curiosity. He wished Newboy would go on, silently, to the poems.
"Publishers, editors, gallery owners, orchestra managers I What incredible parameters for the creative world. But it is a purgatorially instructive one to walk armmd in with such a wound as ours. Still, I don't
helieve anybody ever enters it without having been given the magic
Shield by someone." Newboy's eyes fell again, rose again, and caught
Kidd's. "Would you lilte it?"
"Huh? Yeah. What?"
1oI0n one side," intoned Newboy with twinkling gravity, "is inscribed: 'Be true to yourself that you may be lrue to your work.' On
the other: 'Be true to your work that you may be true to yourself.'"
Once more Newboy's eyes dropped to the page; his voice continued,
preoccupied: "It is It litlie frightening to peer around the edge of your
own and see so many others discarded and glittering aboutin that spHty
landscape. Not (0 mtBtion all those naked people doing all those strange
things on the tops of their various hills, or down in their several dells,
some of them-Lord, how many?-beyond doubt out of their minds!
At the same time-" he turned another page--"nothing is quite as humbling, after a very little while, as realizing how close one has already
come to dropping it a dozen times oneself, having been distractedHouse of the Ax 259 heavens, not-not by wealth or fame, but by those endless structures Oflogic and necessity that go so tediously on before they read!. the in- evitable flaw that causes their joints to shatter and allow you passage. One picks one's way about through tAe glass and aluminum doOlS, the receptionists' smiles, the lunches wiili too much alcohol, the openings with more, the mobs of people desperately trying to define good taste in such loud voices one can hardly hear oneself giggle, while the she- bang is lit by flashes and flaTes through the paint-stained window, glimmers under the police-locked door, or, if one is taking a rare walk outside that day, by a light suffUSing the whole sky, complex as the northern aurora_ At any rate, they make every object from axletrees to zarfs and finjons cast the most astorushing shadows." Mr Newboy glanced. up again. "Perhaps you've followed some dozen such lights to their source?" He held the page between his fmgers. "Admit it-since we are talking as equals-most of the time there simply wasn't any- thing there. Though to your journal-" he let the page fall back to what he'd been perusing before- "or in a letter to a friend you feel will take care to preserve it, you will also admit the whole experience was rather marvelous and filled you with inadmissible longings that you would be more than a little rorious to see settle down and, after all, admiss. Sometimes you Simply found a plaque which read, 'Here Mozart met Da Ponte,' or 'Rodin slept here.' Three or four times you discovered a strange group heatedly discussing something that happened on that very spot a very long time by, which, they assure you, you would have thoroughly enjoyed had you not arrived too late. If you can bear them, if you can listen, if you can learn why they are still there, you will. have gained something quite valuable. 'For God's sakes, put down that thing in your hand and stay a whilel' It's a terribly tempting invitation. So polite themselves, they are the only people wbo seem willing to make allowances for your natural barbarousness. And once or .twice, if you were lucky, you found a quiet, elderly man who, when you mumbled something about dinner for him and his slightly dubious friend, as- tounded you by saying, 'Thank you very much; we'd be delighted.' Or an old Woman watching the baseball game on her television, who, when you brought her flowers on her birthday, smiled through the chain on the door and explained, 'That's very sweet of you boys, but I just don't see anyone now, any more, ever.' Oh. that thing in your hand. You do still have it, don't you?" "Sir, maybe if-?" Newboy moved his hand, looked back down. "It starts out mirrored
260 Dhalgren
on both sides: initially reassuring, but ultimately distracting. It rather
gets in the way. But as you go on, the silvering starts to wear. Now you
can see more, and more, directly through. Really-" Newboy glanced
up quickly, then returned his eyes to the page-"irs a lens. The rrallosition period is almost always embarrasSing, however. While you are
still being dazzled with bits of your own reflection, you have begun to
suspect that it might, after all, be one-way glass-with a better view
afforded from out there! Still, once used to it, you find the view more
interesting. With only a little practice, you get so you can read both
legends at once, without having to stop what you're doing to turn the
thing around. Ob, and how many, many times you came close to clashing into someone you thought buck-naked only to find his Shield had
grown transparent as your own. You become chary of judging too
qUickly who still has, and who, has discarded, his. And when some
youngster, glitteringly protected, through malice or; worse, some incomprehensible vision of kindness, shouts up at the dreadfully stark
crag on which you happen to be panting, or down into the fetid ravine
from which you are manfully trying to clamber with only one arm free,
'You're naked, don't you understand?' you may. momentarily, squint to
make sure the double legend is still etched before you, but you are not
liable to waste much energy setting him srraight unless your own vision
of kindness is as incomprehensible as his. There are more important
things to do. As best you can, you go about doing them. But things still
interrupt: now your eyes a,re deviled by a recurrent, polychrome flash.
You try to ignore it. But its frequency increases. From habit, you check
the cut runes to make sure. But, frankly, during the moments of illumination, it is practically impossible for you to read them, much less
decide whether they still contain sense. The thing you have been baring, not to mention staring through all this time, has become an immense prism.' Newboy leaned back now, his eyes somewhere on ,the
underside of the balcony. "Did I say the first transition was embarrassing? This one is monstrous. And it is the same fear: one-way glass! If
only you didn't remember all those other, endless, elderly ladies with
their water color sets, the old men with their privately printed poems,
whom one had, out of politeness, brought flowers for or invited out to
dinner, as well, even though their heads were wrapped in tin foil and
they babbled ceaselessly about Poetry and Truth. After aB, they were
nice in a useless sort of way, which is, after all, the only way to be truly
nice. You even could discern two or three of the proper letters among
the foil folds, admittedly cut Crom cardboard and taped there with
House of the Ax 261
sticking plaster. Are all these humbling fireworks some sort of cruel
second childhood, a defect in the eye: You begin to suspect, as you
gaze through this you-shaped hole of insight and fire, that though it
is the most important thing you own-never deny that for an inhas not shielded you from anything terribly important. The
only consolation is that ,though one could have thrown it away at any
time, morning or night, one didn't. One chose to endure. Without any
assurance of immortality; or even competencet one only knows one
has not been cheated out of the consolation of carpenters, accountants,
doctors, ditch-diggers, the ordinary people who must do useful things
to be happy. Meander along, then, half blind and a little mad, wondering when you actually learned-was it before you began?-the terrifying fact that had you thrown it away, your wound would have been no
more likely to heal: indeed, in an affluent society such as this, you
might eVen have gone on making songs, poems, pictures, and getting
paid. The only difference would have been-and you learned it listelloing to all those brutally unhappy people who did throwaway theirsand they do, after all, comprise the vast and terrifying majority-that
without it, there plainly and starkly would have been nothing there; no,
nothing at a'll."
Newboy fixed his eyes on Kidd's. Kidd smiled and felt uncomfortable. Then he felt belligerent, which maybe tainted the smile. He was
going to say, Do you always rap like this when somebody ...
The notebook SUddenly slipped from Newboy's knees. The poet
bent, but Kidd snatched it up first.
Its back cover had fallen open. Kidd frowned at the final block of
handwriting that ran off the page bottom:
... The sky is stripped. I am too weak to write much. But I still hear
them walking in the trees; not speaking. Waiting here, away from the terrifying weapon1)l out of the halls of vapor and light, beyond holland and
into the hills, I have come to
"Do you ... ' Kidd's hand fell on the page. He looked up slowly.
The chain snaked around his wrist up his arm. It crossed his belly,
his chest, between the vest flaps. "Do you think that's what they mean?"
"Pardon me?"
Kidd hooked his thumb beneath the chain and pulled it. "These. Do
you think thars what they're supposed 10 mean?'
Mr Newboy laughed. "I haven't the faintest idea! You have them. I
don't. I've seen people with them, here, but no. No. I was just using
them. Oh, no! I would never presume to say what they meant. n
I' ,I 262 Dhalgren
Kidd looked down again. "Do you always go on like that to people
who bring you poems?" he asked, with nowhere near the belligerence
he had intended: He grinned.
Newboy was still laughing. "All right." He waved his hand. "Read
SOme ·0£ them to me, now.' He sat forward, took another sip, then put
his cup down. "No, really, I want to hear some of them out loud."
"Okay,' Kidd said, expecting to Ceel resentment, but experiencing
a dilIerent anxiety altogether. He noted with concern, once more, the
number of pages left with free sides.
"Read one about the dog-thing. I liked that one.'
"MurieU.?"
Newboy nodded, hands together in his lap. •
Kidd tUrned toward the front of the book.
He began to read.
Breathlessness left about the third line. Somewhere, something like
enjoyment bloomed under his tongue and, rather than tripping it, somehow made it more sensitive, so that, without pause he realized how the
vowels in both loom and flow took off from the same point but went different places. He found his face hollOwing for the more resonant tones.
He let them move the muscles about his mouth till staccato tsand hs
riddled the fmalline and made him smile.
"Lovely," Newboy said. "'In a rather horrifying way. Read the one in
front ofit."
He read, and lost himseiC in the movements of his mouth, till a momentary convocation in the ear stunned him into a shriller voice. Then
the long sounds quieted the answer.
"There are two voices in dialogue in that one, aren't there; Newboy commented at the finish. "I didn't pick it up just glanCing at it."
"Huh? Ob, yeah. Maybe I should set them apart on the page-»
"No, no'" Mr Newboy sat up and motioned. "No, believe me, it isn't
necessary. It would be perfectly clear in a page of print. It was my attention reading, believe me. Just go on. »
He read.
What had come to him as images (among which he had pecked with
tongue tip and pen point) returned, shocked, luminous-sometimes
more, sometimes less vivid than memory, but so rich he thrust them
out with his tongue to keep from trying to eat them.
"Its so much fun; Newboy said, "that you enjoy your own poems
so much. Have you ever noticed how free verse lends tatum into
iambic pentameter all by itself? Especially by people who haven't written much poetry."
House of the Ax 263
"Sid!!
·Well, it's only natural. It's the natural rhythm of English speech.
You know, when the line goes ba-da, ba-da, ba-da, ba-da, ba-da? Oh,
nOW don't sit there and look confused. Read some more. I'm not going
to get pedantic again. I am enjoying this. Really."
Kidd was happily embarrassed. His eyes dropped-to the page. Kidd
read; turned; read ... Several times he thought he must be going on
awfully long. But Newboy motioned for another, and once asked to
hear both versions ("I saw that you had two when I was looking
through ... » and, after the earlier version: "Well, most of your revisions are in the right direction.") and had him reread several more.
More confident, Kidd chose others now, went back to One he had left
out, ,then skipped ahead, gathering some enjoyment that was not pride,
was greatest when he was least aware of the man eating cookies before
him, was a supportive pattern in the caverns under the tongue.
He stopped to glance at N ewboythe poet was frowning at something not him.
Lanya said (in a voice that made Kidd turn, f"owning) ten feet down
the terrace: "I ... I didn't mean to interrupt." It was blue, it was shredded, it was silk.
that?"
"My ... dress.' She came forward carrying it over her arm. "I
looked upstairs in the Observatory Wing ... for my dress, while you
were reading. Christ, it's a mess up therel"
Mr Newboy frowned. "I didn't even know anybody was staying
there."
"It doesn't look like anybody is," she said, "now.'
"Is that on the third floor?"
Lanya nodded.
"Roger said something about not using that section-the doors
were closed, weren't they? I thought it was something about plumbing
repairs."
"they were closed but theyweren' t locked.' utnya said. "I just went
right in. They were using it when I was here-I was just looking for
the room Phil and I stayed in. But ... the carpets have been pulled up
off the floor; and torn. It looks like somebody yanked the light fixtures
out of the ceiling, with about a foot of plaster each. In the bathroom
off our bedroom, the sink's just sitting in middle of the floor, and
all that lovely blue Victorian tllework has been smashed. There'Ie two
holes in the wall that look like they've been put there with a battering
ram-and somebodys slashed all the mattresses I" She looked down at
264 Dhalgren
the shredded material. "And my dress. It was balled up in a corner of
the closet ... the clothes bars wore all pulled down and the clothes
hook bad been hammered back and bent or something." She held the
dress up. "Somebody had to do this-it looks like somebody's been at
it with a razor! But what in the woddfor?"
"Oh, dear!" Mr Newboy said. "Why, that's perfectly-"
"I mean it doesn't matter," Lanya said. "About the dress. When 1 left
it, I didn't think t was earning back for it. But why in the world-?"
She looked at Kidd, at Newboy. Suddenly she said, "Oh, hey-I dido'·t
mean to interrupU" She pulled the dress together into a ball, leaned
hack against ,the balustrade. "Please, go on. Don't SlOp reading, Kidd-"
Kidd said, "Let's go up and take a look at-"
"No," Lanya said, surprisingly loud.
Newboy blinked.
"No, Ireally don't wantto go back up there."
"But ... ?" Kidd frowned.
"Roger did ask us all not to go intbat wing,' Newboy said, uncomfortably. "But I had no idea it was-"
"I closed the doors." Lanya looked at the blue silk in her fist. "I
should have left this up there."
"Maybe some wild party got out of hand?" Kidd asked.
Lanya said: "1t didn't look like any party to me."
Newboy, Kidd suddenly saw (aad realized at the same time tbat
Lanya saw it too) was upset Lanya's response was: "Is the coffee hot?
I think I'd like a cup."
"Certainly." Newboy stood, went to the urn.
"Go on, Kidd," Lanya said. "Read another poem," as Newboy
brought her the cup.
"Yes.' The elderly poet, collecting himself, returned to his chair.
"Lets hear another one. Jl
"All right." Kidd paged through: they were all in some conspiracy
to obliterate, if not Lanya's news itself, at least its unsettling effect. And
he's got to live here, Kidd thought. There were only three more poems.
the second, Lanya said: "That one's one of my favorites." Her
hand moved over lOrn blue, folded over the wall.
And he read the third. "So now," Kidd said, primarily to keep samething going, "you've got to give me some idea of what you think of
them, whether they're good or bad," a thought which hadn't occurred
to him once since he'd come; only previous mental rehearsal brought
it out noW.
House of the Ax 265
"r thoroughly enjoyed hearing you read them," Newboy said. "But
for anything else, you simply have to say to yourself, with Mann: I cannot know, and you cannot tell me."
Kidd smiled, reached for three more cookies on the teawagon, tried
to think of something eIse.
Newboy said: "Why don't we take a stroll around the grounds? If it
were a bright sunny day, it would be quite spectacular I'm sure. But it's
stiU nice! in an autumnal sort of way. f)
Urnya, who was looking into her cup, suddenly raised her eyes. "Yes,
that'S an idea. I'd like that."
And that, Kidd realized, was Newboys kindness to Lanya. Somehow
after her initial confidence, a moodiness 'had surfaced, but she had
jumped to dispel it with movement and converse.
She put down her saucer, got down from the balustrade.
Kidd started to ask her: "Are you gonna take your ... ?"
But obviously she wasn't.
What, he wondered as they walked along the terrace and turned
down the low steps, would be the emotional detritus from the violence
upstaifS ia himself? But, as he wondered, Lanya, at the bOllom step,
took hold of his little finger in a hot, moist grip.
They walked across grass till rock rose from under it.
They climbed stone steps. They crossed a bridge with wrought
raijings.
A waterfall rushed beside them, stilled beneath them.
"This is April," Mr Newboy informed them from the plaque in the
bridgeS center.
They crossed it
The corner bit Kidd's heel.
"You must koow these quite well," Newboy said to Lanya.
"Not really. Butliike them.· She nodded.
"I've always meant to ask Roger why he has September and July ia
each others place."
"Are they?" lonya asked. "I must have walked around here fifty
times and never noticed! 11
They left the bridge to stroll under huge-leafed catalpas, past hird
baths, past a large bronze sundial, tarnished brown and blank of
shadow.
Stone benches were set out before the hedges in August.
Beyond the trees he could see the lawns of September. They passed
through high stone newels where a wrought iron gate was loose from
266 Dhalgren
the bottom hinge, and, finally, once more, they were on the gravel
driveway curving through great, squat evergreens.
Mr Newboy walked them to the front gate. By the green guardshack, they exchanged Good-byes, So longs, I really enjoyed myselfs,
You must come agains, and more good-byes, during which, Kidd felt,
as the gate-latch clanked behind them, each person had spoken one
time too many.
He turned on the sidewalk to take Lanyas hand, sure she would
bring up the shattered Observatory wing the moment silence settled.
They walked.
She didn't.
After a doten steps she said, "You want to write, don't you?" which,
he realized, was what this compulsion to articulation was.
"Yeah," he said. "I guess I'll stop oII at the bar, maybe do something
there.f!
"Good," shesaid. "I'm going back to the park, But I'll come by
Teddy's later."
"Okay."
She ambled beside him, shoulder brushing his, sometimes making
at the houses beside them, sometimes at the pavement before them,
sometimes glancing up at a willow-lapped wan.
He said: "You wantto go alI and play your harmonica, don't you?"
knowing it by the same pattern of silent cues she had known his desire. He put his arm around her shoulder; their walks fell into sync.
"Yes.:n
He thought his own thoughts, occasionally glanCing to wonder what
hers were.
Silent in the circuit of the year, speech is in excess of what I want
to say. or believe. On the dismal air I sketch my own restraint, waking reflexively, instant to instant. The sensed center, the moment of
definition, the point under such pressure it extrudes a future and a
past I apprehend only as a chill, extends the overlay ofinjury with
some retentive, tenuous disease, the refuse ofbrick-and-mortar-grmding
violence. How much easier all machination were such polarized perception to produce so gross an ideal.
Speech, the notebook's owner had written across from the page where
Kidd wrote now, is always in ""cess oj poetry as print ...
"Hello."
He looked up from the counter (in the cage the silver dancer bowed
House oj the Ax 267
to thin applause and flicked through the black curtain), then down as
the dog gave a short bark.
"Muriel-!11
"Hello, Madame Brown. I haven't seen you in a while. H
"Odd: I haven't seen you either." She laughed, high to low. "God,
this place is dead tonight. May I sit down? You can pretend to buy an
old woman a drink."
"Sure----D
"But I'm interrupting your work. n
He shrugged. "I'm sort of at a Stopping point. "
As Madame Brown sat, the bartender brought her usual and replaced Kidds beer. "What are you writing. Another poem?"
"A long one. Its in the natural rhythm of English speech."
She raised her eyebrow, and reflexively he closed the book; then
wished he hadn't. "How are Mr and Mrs Richards, and June?"
"Oh.» She flattened her knuckles to the wood. "Like always."
"They like their new place?"
She nodded. "I was over there for dinner night before last. But this
evening they're having other guests, apparently. It was quite amusing
to watch Mary try and make sure I didn't just aCcidentally drop around
tonight.· She didn't laugh. "Qh, yes, theire quite settled in now." She
sat back. "I wish there were some more people. The city soaks them
up; or maybe people are just ... leaving?"
Kidd put the orchid on the cOver of his book where it balanced on
the three longest prongs.
"I guess you have to carry that around, don't you.· Madame Brown
laughed. "Perhaps I ought to get one. Perhaps I've just been very lucky
in this dangerous city?"
From opposite sides he moved his hands together till his blunt fingertips bumped in the cage, and the blade points tugged back the skin
between, burning now, about to cut. "I've got to go back to see them."
He separated his fingers a little. "About my money."
"You haven't been
"Five dollars, the fust day.» He looked at her. "That morning I met
you in the park, you said they'd told you they'd pay five an hour."
She nodded and said something softly. He thought he heard " ...
poor kid,· but could Bot tell if "poor" were preceded by "you" or followed by comma and capital.
"How did they tell you?"
She looked at him questioningly.
"What did they say to you, exactly?"
268 Dhalgren
She turned her frown to her glass. "They told me that if I found a
young man who might help them with their moving, I should tell him
they would pay him five dollars an hour."
IIMr Richards?"
"That's right."
"It's one of ·the reasons I took the job. Though, Lord knows, you
don't need it here. But I guess they knew what they were doing, then?"
·You should have spoken to him. He'd have given you some ...
thing."
"I want him to give me what he said he was going to-shit, I
couldn't ask him that last day."
"Yes, it would have been a little odd."
"I'm going to have to go back and talk to him, I guess." He opened
his notebook. "I think I'm going to write some more now, malam. n
"I wish there were more people here." She pushed back from the bar.
"WeH, its early.
But she wasn't listening.
He went through the pages till he found: ... as print is in excess of
words. I want to write but can fIX with words only the desire itself. I suppose I should take some small comfort in the fact thatJor the few writers
I .have actually known, publication, indirect proportion to the talent of
each, seems to have been an occurrence always connected with catastrophe. Then again, perhaps they were simply a strange group of· - .
"Ba-da," he whispered and turned over the notebook to the blank
page, "ba-da, ba-da, ba-da, ba-da."
The letter was still in the mailbox.
Among the bent and broken doors, red, white, and blue edging
crossed this one, intact grille. He thought he could see the inking of a
return address. 1 Can pretend, he thought, it says Edward Richards,
from a hotel in Seattle, Washington, off Fremont Avenue, on 43rd. He
could make some things appear like that, when it was this dim ... He
turned and went to ·the elevator.
Someone, alleast, had mopped the lobby.
He: pressed the button.
Wind hissed from the empty shaft. He stepped into the other.
He'd COme out in the pitch-dark hall before-as the door went kchunk-he realized habit had made him push seventeen, not nineteen.
He scowled in the dark and walked forward. His shoulder brushed a
House of the Ax 269
wall. He put out his hand and felt a door. He walked forward till he felt
another.
then he stopped-because of the smell. He scowled harder.
By the time he reached the next door (three, four doors on that side
of,the hall?) the odor was nauseous and sharp. "Jesus ... " he whispered; his breath echoed.
He made himself go on.
The next door, which had to be the Richards' old apartment, swung
in under his hand. The stench made him reel and lose kinesthetic
focus. He hurried back, twice banging walls, one with his left shoulder, one with his right.
He was wondering how long it would take him to feel for the elevator bell .. .
K-chunk ... k-chunk ... k.chunk. One of the doors had caught on
something. Between k-chunks, reminiscent of his own breath came
I
He paused, disoriented in the putrid dark. The left elevator door?
The right? Then fear, like the lightest forefinger, tickled his shoulder.
He nearly bent double, and staggered against the wall; which was not
a wall, because it gave. .
Inside the exit door, he caught the banister, and stumbled down.
Faint light greyed the glass a flight below. Gulping fresh breath, he
came out in the hall of sixteen. One bulb burned at the far end ..
His next gulp checked explosive giggles. Kidd shook his head. Well,
what the fuck were they supposed to do with it? He started down the
hall, grinning and disgusted. Still, then why did I go to all that to drag
it up?
When he knocked on the door, millings suggested it was opened.
When he pushed it in, a girl caught her breath. "Hey, who's home?" he
asked.
''Who ... who is it?" She sounded afraid and exhausted. The window
let in dark blue over the iron bunks, piles of clothing, an overturned
stool.
"It's the Kid." He was still grinning.
"They're all gone," she said, from the muddle of blankets. "There's
just me. Please ... they're all gone."
"I'm not going to do anything.' He stepped in.
She pushed herself up on her elbow, brushed hair back from her mce
and blinked hruised eyes.
"You're ... the one who was sick? II
270 Dhalgren
"I'm better" she whined. "Really, I'm better. Just leave me alone. "
, " "Thirteen, and the others? How long have they been gone?
She let herself fall, Sighing.
"Are they coming back?"
'"No. Look, just-»
"Do you have food and things?"
.Please ... yes, I'm all right. They split a couple of days ago. What
do you want?"
Because he had once feared her, he stepped closer. "Don't you have
any light?"
"Lights, huh?" Plurality and inflection baffled him. "Look, I'll be all
right, just go away. Ughts? Over there .. ." She gestured toward the
mannequin. .
He went to see what she pointed at. "Has Faust been canting to
check you out? He was all worried about you last time I was here." Bald
plaster breasts were snaked with chain.
"Yeah he comes. look around the neck." That was further instruction. "So'me guy left them. He ain't gonna come back." She coughed.
"They dorr t got no battery." .'
He lifted the heavy lioks from the joined neck. The smlie was pamt
streaked and chipped under one eye. "Lights? Light shield?" The thing
linked to the bottom clicked on the plaster chin, nose, forehead.
"All right. Nowjust go, will you?"
"It doesn't have a battery?"
She only sighed, rusded her covers. •
«All right, if you say you're okay, I'll go." Something in him ...
thrilled? That's what he'd heard people say. The fear was low, the physical reaction runneled and grave. He dared the ntirror:
Her bunk was with shadoW and crumpled blankets.
"All right: he repeated. "Good-bye. Tell Thirteen or Denny if they
comeback-n
She sighed; she rusded. "They're nOt coming back."
So he shut the door behind him. Ontinous: but what would he have
had her tell? He put the chain around his neck. A blade snagged the
links. He pulled hiS bladed hand away.
Light shield?
The thing linked to the bottom was spherical, the diameter of a silver dollar, black, and set with lenses. The heavy links crossed the brass
chain and glass bits. He ran his thumb around the back of his vest,
shrugged the lapels closed, and walked up the hall.
House of the Ax 271
The elevator opened.
Rising in the dark, "19" suspended orange at eye level, he thought
about batteries and rubbed his naked stomach.
At the Richards' new apartment door he heard voices. A woman
neither Mrs Richards nor June, laughed. '
He rang.
Carpet-muffled heels approached.
"Yes?" Mrs Richards asked. "Who is it?" The peekhole clicked. "It's
Kidd!"
The chain rattled, the door swung back.
·Why, come in! Bill, Ronnie, Lynn; this Is the young man we were
telling you about!· Air from the opened balcony doors beat the candle
flames: light flapped through the foyer. "Come in, come in. Kidd, some
friends of Arthurs ... from work. Arthur? They came over for dinner.
Would you like some coffee with us? And dessert?"
"Look, if you're busy, just let me talk to Mr Richards a minute?"
"Kidd?" Mr Richards called from the dining room. "Come on in, will
yoU?H
. sought for an expression but, finding'nothing adequate for his
Impanence, came, patiently, inside; he settled on a frown.
Mrs Richards' sntile was perfect.
Kidd went into the dining room.
The WOman sitting next to Mr Richards was doing something with
her earriog. "You write poems, Mary told us. Are you going to read us
some?"
"Huh? Oh. No, I didn't bring any."
The man across from her took his leather-patched elbows from the
tablecloth. "That's a rather dangerous looking thing you did bring."
"Oh," Kidd looked at the orchid. "Well, it's almost dark out." He
snapped the band open, shucked the fmger harness, while the people
up and down the table chuckled.
From where he stood, the flame at the white wax taper tip covered
June's left eye. She smiled.
"Here,' Mrs Richards said behind him. "Here's a chair. Move down
a little bit, Sam. Pour him a cup of coffee, Arthur."
"What do you think I'm doing, honey," Mr Richards said with total
affability.
A large WOman in brown corduroy began to talk again with the man
On her left. The cup passed from hand to hand.
The woman in the green dress smiled, but couldn't keep her eyes
272 Dhatgren
(pale grey) from flicking at the steel cage he had set on the corner of
the tablecloth. She put the cup beside it. MIs Richards held the back of
her chair, about to sit. "Really, just like I was telling you, Kidd abo
solutely saved our lives. He was such a help. We were beginning to
think of him as part of the family."
At the other end of the table, a large man rubbed one finger against
his nose and said, "Mary, you've been about to bring in that dessert for
fifteen minutes now; and I'm on my second cup of coffee."
Mrs Richards laughed. "I have been talking on. Here, I'll bring it in
right now."
June, her small fists whispering in white taffeta, rounded the table
for the kitchen.
The man beside the woman in green leaned around her and said,
"Mary's just been going on all about you and your poems. You just live
downtown, near the park?"
"Yeah," he said .. "Where do YOR live?"
"Ah.ha." Still leaning forward he fingered the collar of his sports
shirt. "Now; that's a very good question." His nails were not clean and
the side of the collar was frayed. "That'S a very good question indeed."
He sat back, still laughing.
Still plucking at her earring, the woman at Mr Richards' right said,
"You don't look like a poet. You look like one of those. people
they're always writing about in the Times.'
"Scorpions?" said the very blond man (tweed and leather elbow
patches) over his clasped hands. "His hair isn't long enough.'
"His hair is long,' insisted the earring plucker.
"Long enough, "explained the blond man and turned to look for a
napkin fallen by June's vacated chair.
Kidd grinned at the woman. "Where do you live?"
She stopped plucking, looked surprised. "Ralph and I used to be out
on Temple. But now we've been staying-" and stopped because some·
body said something on her other side, or may have even elbowed her.
"You like it better there?' Kidd asked, vaguely curious as to where
Temple was.
"If you can like anything in Bellona, right now!'
Mrs Richards entered with a la.rge glass bowl.
"What is that?" the man on Mr Richards' left asked. "Jello?"
"No, it Mrs Richards set the bowl before Mr Richards.
"It's wine jelly." She frowned atthe purple Sea. "Port. The recipe didn't
mention any sugar. But I think that was probably a mistake, so I put
some in, anyway."
Hause of the Ax 273
Beside Mrs Richards, June held a bowl heaped with whipped cream,
glossy as the taffeta. Wrapped around one wrist, glittering in the cand1elight ... No, Kidd thought, she have taken them off the ...
But the idea made him grin.
IlDo you want to serve that, Arthur?"
At his corner Kidd contemplated being belligerently nice to the
woman with the earring. But she was too far away. He turned to the
woman beside him in green. "You work with Mr Richards?"
"My husband used to," she said and passed him a white-capped
dessert dish.
He ate a spoonful: maple.
"I," he said and swallowed, "have to talk to Mr Richards about Some
money. You like it here?"
"Oh, it's a very nice apartment. You moved all the furniture for
them, they told us.'
He smiled, nodded, and decided he just couldn't take grape jello
with maple flavored whipped cream.
The beside the woman leaned around again: "I didn't really
work WIth Arthur. I used to work for Bill over there who used to do
statting for MSE-where Arthur works. So Lynn and me, we just came
along."
"Oh," Lynn said deprecatingly while Kidd drank coffee, "we just
have to extend ourselves, you knoW; while all this is going on."
"That!; what I'm doing; that's what I'm doing. A bunch of us have
gotten together, you see. We're living together in ... well, we're living together. I mean We were just about to get chased out of our house.
By some guys with those things, you know?' The man pOinted to the
orchid. "But today, I'd wear one if I had it. n
"No, you wouldn't!" Lynn insisted. "You wouldn't.'
"It's pretty rough," Kidd said.
"The way we got together," Lynn went on to explain. 'Uits much
better for the children. You see?"
"Yeah, sure!" heard her suddenly helpless tone he respondedto it.
"What's there around here to write poems about?" That was her husband "I mean, nothing ever happens. You sit around scared to
go outside. Or when you do, it's like walking into a swamp."
"That's the whole thing," Lynn acknowledged. "Really. In Bellona, I
mean, now. There's nothing to do. n
From her father's side, June said: "Kidd writes lovely poems." Under
the candles, shadows bobbled in the cream.
274 Dhalgren
• Oh, yes," MIS Richards a!fumed, setting down dishes of jelly before the large woman in corduroy and the blond man in tweeds. "Kidd,
you will read something to us, won't you?"
"Yes, n Mr Richards said. "I think Kidd should read a poem. n
Kidd sucked his teeth with annoyance. "I don't have any. Not with
rne. H
Mrs Richards beamed: "r have one. Just a moment. n She turned and
hurried out.
Kidd's annoyance grew. He took another spoonful of je\lo; which he
hadn't wanted. So drank the rest of his coffee. He hadn't wanted that
either.
"Here we are!" Mrs Richards cried, returning; she slipped the blueedged paper before him.
"Oh," Kiddsaid. "1 forgot you had this one."
"Go on, read it. n
"Better be goodl said blond and tweedy, affably enough. "Otherwise Ronnie will run the other way ,every time she sees you on the
street because she thinks you'ra a-"
"I don't go out on the streets," Ronnie said. "I want to hear what
kind of poems you write. Go on."
A man who wasrrt Mr Richards said, "I don't know very much about
poetry."
"Stand up, Kidd," MrRicl,1ards said, waving a creamy spoon. "So we
can hear you. n
Kidd stood and said as levally as possible, "Mr Richards, 1 just came
to see you about getting my money for the work 1 did, n and waited for
reactidn.
Mr Richards moved his shoulders back and smiled.
Somewhere-outside in the hall?-a door closed.
Mrs Richards, holding the edge of the table and smiling, nodded:
"Go on, Kidd.·
Ronnie said to Mrs Richards: "He wants his money: He's a pretty
practical poet." Though she spoke softly, everyone laughed.
, He looked down at Mrs Richards' copy of his poem, and drew his
tongue back f<om his teeth for the fitst word.
In the hall, a man screamed, words or inflection: footsteps,
some dull thuds-the scream changed pitch at each of them.
Kidd started reading. He paused at the third line, wanting very
much to laugh, but didn't look up.
Footsteps: running voices arguing-a lot of them.
House of the Ax 275
Kidd kept reading till he reached Mrs Richards' omitted comma .
Lynn, beside him, let out a little cry. From the corner of his eye he
saw her husband take her arm. Somebody banged on the wall
what like a .crowbar. And the screaming cracked to a hystencal, MeXlcan accent: Oh, come onj please, come on Iemme 'lone.
Don'.t fool 'round like that--No! Gmon, e'mon-No. Don' please-"
Kidd read the last lines of his poem and looked up.
The crashes had moved from the wall to the door, and fell with
tJmed, deliberate thuds. Within the crash, as though it were an envelope of sound, he could hear the chain rattle the hmges]'iggle the lock
click. "
As he looked around the table, the thought passed with oblique idleness: look like I probably do when somebodys eyes go red.
Quts\de, above the shouting, somebody laughed.
Kidds own. fear, dogged and luminous and familiar enough to be almost unconsCIOUS, was fixed somewhere in the hall. Yet he didn't want
to laugh. He still wanted to giggle.
Out there, someone began to run. Others ran after. '!' muscle on the back of Kidd's thigh tensed to the crashing. He
smiled, vaguely, confused. The back of his neck was tickly.
Someones chair squeaked.
·Oh, for God's sake, why don't they-" and, where rhythm prediCted the next crash, only her word fell: "-stop!'
Footsteps lightened, tumbled oIT down steps, retreated behind
banged doors.
Kidd sat down, looked at the guests, some of whom looked at him,
whom at each other; the woman iu corduroy was lookmg at her lap; Mrs RIchards was breathing hard, He wondered if anyone liked his poem.
·They do that around here too, huh?" Sam forced, jocularly.
Then a woman Kidd could DOt really see at the table's end spilled
coffee.
"Oh, I'll get a rag!' Mrs Richards screamed, and fled the room.
Three people tried to say nothing iu particular at once.
But when Mrs Richards returned with a black and white, op-art dishtowel, one voice detacbed itself, a hesitant baritone: "For Gods sakes
can't we do about that? I mean, we've got to do something!;
Of the only sharp one Kidd felt was annoyance,
"Mr Richards? he saId, still standing, "Mr Richards? Can I talk to you
now?1I
276 Dhalgren
Mr Richards raised his eyebrows, then pushed back his chair. June,
beside him, surprisingly concerned, touched her father's arm, ... restrainingly? protectively? Mr Richards brushed her hand away and
carne down the table.
Kidd picked up his orchid and went out into the hall.
The woman in corduroy was saying, "When you can think of something to do, will you please let me know what it is. You'll have my cooperation one hundred per cent. One hundred per cent, believe me."
At the doOI Kidd turned. "We should get this five dollars an hour business settled now, don?t you thiok, Mr Richards, because it'lljust-"
Mr Richards' slight, taught smile broke. "What are you trying to do,
huh?" he demanded in a whisper. "What are you Irying to do? I mean
five dollars an hour, you must be crazy!"
Mrs Richards, still holding the dishtowel, drifted up behind her husband's shoulder, blioking, in perfect imitation of Smokey with Thirteen.
"I mean just what are you trying to do ?" Mr Richards went on. "We
don't have any money to give you, and you better understand that."
"Huh?" because it seemed absurd.
"Five dollars an houd" Mr Richards repeated. "You must be crazy!"
His voice was insistent, tense and low. "What does somebody like you
need that kind of money for, anyway? It doesn't cost anything to live
in this city-no food bills, no rent. Money doesn't mean anything
here any more. What are you trying to do ... ? I've got a wife. I've got
a family. MSE hasn't had a payroll for months. There hasn't even been
anyone in the damn office! I've got to hold on to what I have. 1 can't
spend that kind of money now, with everything like this. I can' t-"
"Well, isn't that what you told-'--?" He was angry. "Oh shit. Look,
then why don't you .. ." Then he reached around to his pocket.
Mr Richards' eyes widened as the orchid Kidd held flicked by him.
But Kidd only dug at his pocket. "Then why don't you keep this
too?" Mr Richards swayed when the moist, green knot bounced off his
shirt and fell to the floor, unfolding like paper on fire.
Kidd turned the lock and pulled the door open. The chain stopped
it-ratch!-at two inches.
Mis Richards, immediately beside him, fumbled with the catch. A
step into the hall, he looked back to show them his disgtlst.
The astonishment Mr Richards returned him, as Mrs Richards with
varied bitternesses at her eyes, closed the door on it, was unexpected,
was satisfying, was severed with the doors' clash. .
He counted the fifteen, paint-chipped dents before he deCIded
(someone was laughing inside again) to go.
House of the Ax 277
Iu the elevator, he dropped, ruminaliag. Once he looked up to wrinkle his nOSe at a faint putrescence. But dropped on. Echoing in the
shaft, with the wind, were footsteps from some stairwell, were voices.
There was no one in the lobby.
Salisfied?
His annoyance, at any rate.
But all the vagtle and loose remains roiled and contended for definition. "Ba-da ba-da ba-da?" he asked. "Ba-da ba-da," he answered,
Sitting. It listed like oil on turbulence. At last Ba-da ba-da ba-da?
formed around the fragments of a question, but Ba-da ba-da fit no
worded answer. He flexed his fingers around the pen point till they
ached, then went back to struggliog with the recalcitrant quantities of
sound overlapping their sense. He reread some dozen alternate lines
for the beginning of one section: with the delight of resignation, he
decided, with the change of a "This" to a "That," on his initial version.
A candle on the high windowsill cast the batteryless projector's
swinging shadow across the notebook opened on his naked thigh.
Someone knocked just at the point he discovered he was copying,
in qUick, cramped letters, the same line for the fourth time (his mind
had meandered on). "Are you in there?" Lanya asked.
"Huh?" He looked up at the door's layered scrawl. ·Yeah. I'm Coming out now." He stood and p,.lled his pants up from around his shins,
pulled the flush chain.
"He said you were in there." She nodded toward the bartender when
Kidd opened the door. ·Come on."
"Huh? Where?"
She smiled. 'Come on." She took his hand.
"Hey;" he called, passing the bar. "You wanna keep this for me
again?"
The bartender leaned over for the notebook. "In the usual place,
kid." He reached up and stuck it through the cage bars.
She paused at the door to ask, "How did it go with the Richards?"
"r gave him back his fucking five bucks."
Her confusion suddenly went in laughter. "That's too much! Tell me
what happened." And she tugged him on into the hallway and out to
the street.
'What happened?" she asked again, shrugging her shoulder into his
armpit. They walked quickly down the block. When she turned to
glance at him, her hair tickled his arm.
278 Dhalgren
"He didn't want to pay me. They were having a dinner party or
something there. So I gave him hack what he gave me already, you
know?" He rubbed his chest underneath his vesillap. At his hip, the
orchid's harness jingled. "You know their kid, the little boy, they just
left him ... " He shook his head against hers. "Hell, I don't want to talk
about that. Where we going?"
"To the park. To the commune."
"Why?ft.
"I'm hungry, for Qne thing."
"Just as well I'm not talking.·
She hurried him across the street, into an ocean of smoke and
evening. He tried to smell it, but his nostrils were numb or acclimated.
The. lions gaped in the blur with stony, astonished protest. They neared
the foggy pearl of a functioning street light. "This morning," Lanya
said, "after you went away to write, some people said that there had
heensome new fires at the other end of the park!"
"Smoke's sure thicker.·
"Down there," she nodded, "before, I thought I could see it flickering. And it hadn't even gotten dark yet.'
"There couldn't be any fires in Ihe park," he announced suddenly.
"The whole thing would just burn up, wouldn't it? ]t would either all
burn or it wouldn1 t. tI
"I guess so. n
"Did they send anybody to check? Maybe they should getsome people down there to dig one of those things, a breakfront." Breakfront?
and heard the word resonate with images of a charred forest, where
years hack he had tramped with a canister of water strapped to his
shoulders, hand pumping from the brass nozzle into Sizzling ash.
"Maybe you and John and his people could go."
She shrugged under his arm. "No, really, I'd rather not go down
there ... n
From her voice he tried to reconstruct what it told him of her expression, and remembered her silting on the stone railing with arms
full of torn blue silk.
"You're scared to death!"
Her head turned abruptly in question or affirmation.
"Why?"
She leaned her head forward and surprised him by reiterating,
"Come on," quietly, sharply.
His bare foot went from concrete to grass.
House of the Ax 279
The night billowed and sagged: habit guided them through a maze
of mist.
He saw quiveriBg fires.
But they were from the commune's cinder block furnace. People
moved silently, listlessly before flame.
Perched along the picnic table, in a variety of army jackets, paisley
shirts, and grubby tank· tops. young people stared through stringy hair.
Someone dragged a sleeping bag in front of the fire. Shadow: pale, hairy
skin; black leather: Tak stood hack from the me, arms folded, legs wide.
the ornate orchid of yellow metal hung from his belt. Three scorpions
stood behind him, whispering.
One was the red-headed, freckled black who had pipe-whipped him
at Calkins; the other two were darker. But his initial start was followed
by no more UIleasiness. Somebody swaggered past with a cardboard
carton of tin cans, crumpled cellophane wrappers, paper cups. He realized (very surprised) he was very high. Thought swayed through his
mind, shattered, sizzled like water in hot ash. Its the smoke, he thought
frantically. Maybe theres something in this fog and smoke. No ...
John walked by the fire's edge, bald chest glistening between his
vest, stopped to talk with Tak; they bent over Tak's weapon. Then, at
.John's wrlst:-brass leaves, sholls, claws: from the ornamented wrist
band lhe overlong yellow blades of the orchid curved down around
John's fingers. He was making motions from the elbow as if he would
have beat his leg were his hand un-armed.
Tak grinned, and John moved away.
Kidd blinked, chill and unsteady. There was Lanya-she had moved
from his side-talking with some of the people around the table. Isolate questions pummeled inarticulately. A muscle twitched in his flank,
and he was terribly afraid of it. He stepped, brushing shoulders with
someone who smelled of wine. The fire put a hot hand against cheek,
chest, and arm, leaving the rest of him cool.
Milly shook her hair somewhere in the shadow of a tree: bloody
copper shingles rattled her shoulders.
Why were they here? Why did they mill here? His inner skull felt
tender and inflamed. Watch them, listen to them, put together actions
and conversation snatches: He searched the screen where perception
translated to information, waiting for somebody to dance, to eat, to
sing. He wished Lanya had told him why they had come. But he was
very tired. So he moved around. Someday I'm going to die, he thought
irrelevantly: But blood still beat inside his ear.
280 Dhalgren
He stepped backward from the heat, and backward again. (Where
was Lanya?) But was too distraught to turn his head. Everything
meant, loudly and insistently, much too much: smoke, untwirling Over
twigs; the small stone biting his heel; the hot band from the fire across
his lowered forehead; the mumblings around him that rose here, fell
there.
Milly stood a few feet in front of him, bare legs working to a music
he couldn't hear. ThenJohn crashed down, crosslegged in the leaves,
beside her, fiddling absently with the blades around his hand.
A while ago, he realized, he had thought once again: Please, I don't
want to be sick again, please, but had hardly heard the thought go by,
and could only now, disinterestedly, discern the echo.
Something, or one, was about to emerge into the clearing-he was
sure; and was equally sure that, naked and glistening, it would be
George! It would beJune!
"Isn't this stupid," someone Kidd couldn't see was saying, ·when I
could be in Hawaii-?"
Tongue tip a pink bud at the corner of his lips, John stared at Milly's
shifting calves. He raised his bladed hand Ca reflection crossed his
chin), and, with a sharp, downward sweep, cut.
Milly gasped, bit alI the gasp, but made no other sound. She did not
step, she did not even look.
Astounded, Kidd watched blood, in a torren! wide Gthe thought
struck irrelevantly amidst his terror) as a pencil run down her heel.
"Look, leave me alone .. . '"
gCome on; come---"
In Time of Plague
"Tak, will you get your fuckin' hands-·
"I'm not after your tired brown body. I just want to get you to the
bar where you can sit down.·
"Look, please I'm ... '
"You're not drunk; you say you're not stoned or anything, then you
damn weD better sit down and relax!" Tak's beefy band clamped his
shoulder. (Kidd took three more unsteady steps.) "You were staggering around there like you were half in some sort of trance. Now come
On with me, sit down, have a drink, and get yourself together. You sure
you didn't take anything?"
The ornate orchid at Tak's belt clashed the skople one at Kidd's.
"Hey, lookl Just come on and leave me alone ... Where's Lanya?"
"She's more likely to find you at Teddy's than wandering around out
. in the dark. You come on.·
In such colloquy they made their hesitant way from park to bar.
Kiddswayed in the doorway, looking at rocking candle flames, while
Tak argued with the bartender:
"Hot brandy! Look, just take your colIee-water there, in a glass with
a shot of. .. "
281
280 Dhalgren
He stepped backward from the heat, and backwa'rd again. (Where
was Lanya?) But was too distraught to turn his head. Everything
meant, loudly and insistently, much too much: smoke, untwirling over
twigs; the sman stone biting his heel; the hot band from the fire across
his lowered forehead; the mumblings around him that rose here, fen
there.
Milly stood a few feet in front of him, bare legs working to a music
he couldn't hear. ThenJohn crashed down, crosslegged in the leaves,
beside her, fiddling absently with the blades around his hand.
A while ago, he realized, he had thought once again: Please, I don't
want to be sick again, please, but had hardly heard the thought go by,
and could only now, disinterestedly, discern the echo.
Something, or one, was about to emerge into the dearing-he was
sure; and was equaUy sure that, naked and glistening, it would be
George! It would beJunel
"Isn't this stupid; Kidd couldn't see was saying, ·when I
could be in Hawaii-?"
Tongue tip a pink bud at the COrner of his lips, John stared at Milly's
shifting calves. He raised his bladed hand (a reflection crossed his
chin), and, with a sharp, downward sweep, cut.
Milly gasped, bit off the gasp, but made no other sound. She did not
step, she did not even look.
Astounded, Kidd watched blood, in a torrent wide (the thought
struck irrelevantly amidst his terror) as a pencil run down her heel.
"Look, leave me alone ... "
"Come on; ·come ......... :n
In Time of Plague
"Tak, will you get your fuckin' hands-"
"I'm not after your tired brown body. I just want to get you to the
bar where you can sit down."
"Look" please I'm ... u
"You're not drunk; you say you're not stoned or anything, then you
damn weH better sit down and relax!" Tak's beefy hand clamped his
shoulder. (Kidd took three more unsteady steps.) "You were staggering around there like you were half in some sort of trance. Now come
On with me, sit down, have a drink, and get yourself together. You sure
you didn't take anything?"
The ornate orchid at Tak's belt clashed the simple one at Kidd's.
"Hey, look! Just come on and leave me alone ... Where's lanyal"
·Shel; more likely to find you at Teddy's than wandering around out
in the dark. You come on."
In such colloquy they made their hesitant way from park to bar.
Kiddswayed in the doorway, looking at rocking candle flames, while
Tak argued with the bartender:
"Hot brandy! Look, just take your coffee-water there, in a glass with
a shot of. .. "
281
282 Dhalgren
June? Or George?
Paul Fenster looked up from his beer, three people down (Kidd felt
something cold but manageable happen in his belly at the recognition),
and came over to stand behind Tak; who turned with two steaming
glasses.
"Huh ... 1"
"So. I've found somebody here 1 know." Fenster was buttoned
halfway up the chest in a red, long-sleeve shirt. "I didn't think 1 would,
and my first night back."
'Oh." Tak nodded. "Yeah. How you doing? Hey, I gotta bring a
friend a drink. Um ... Come on." Tak lifted the brandy glasses over
some woman's shoulder, stepped around some man. Fenster raised his
chin, watching.
Tak came across to Kidd. Fenster came behind.
"Heres your brandy. This is Paul Fenster, my favorite rebel-who-hasmanaged-to-misplace-his-cause."
"That's what you think." Fenster saluted with his beer bottle.
'Well, he didn't misplace it, actually. It went somewhere else when
he wasn't looking. Paul, this is the Kid." (Kidd wondered if he were projecting Tak's lack of enthusiasm.) "Come on over and sit down."
"Hello." Kidd nodded toward Fenster, who wasn't looking at
him, hadn't heard him, apparendy did not recognize him. Well, he
didn't feel like talking anyway, so could be amused at Fenster's
obliqueness.
"Come on, come on." Tak headed them toward a booth, glanced apprehensively at Kidd again.
Gesturiog his bottle, Fenster continued: "Oh, there'S a cause
all right! Maybe you've lost ninety-five per cent of your population, but
you're still the same city you were before-"
"You weren't here, before." Tak sat at the outside edge of the seat,
so Fenster had to sit across the table. Then Yak slipped over, making room for Kidd, who noted the whole maneuver and wondered if
Fenster had.
Kidd .. Tak's leg immediately swung against his in warm, if unwanted, reassurance.
"That's not what I mean," Fenster said. "Bellona was ... what?
Maybe thirty percent black? NoW; even though you've lost so many
people, bet closer to sixty. From my estimate, at any rate."
"All living in harmony, peace, and brotherly love-"
"Bullshit," Fenster said .
• -with the calm, clear, golden afternoon only occasionally torn by
In Time of Plague 283
the sobs of some poor white girl dishonored at the hands of a rampagingbuck."
"What are you trying to do, show off for the kid there?" Fenster
grinned at Kidd. "r met Tak here the first day I got to Bellona. He's a
really together gny, you know? He likes to pretend hel; short on brains.
Then he lets you hang yourself." Fenster still hadn't recognized him.
Kidd nodded over his steamiI)g glass. The fumes stung; he smiled
back and felt ill.
"Oh, I'm the God-damn guardian of the gate. I've spoken to more
people on their first day in this city than you could shake a stick at.'
Tak sat back. "Let me clue you. Its the people I take rime to speak to
again on the third, fourth, and fifth day you should watch. "
"Well, you're still kidding yourself if you think you don't have a
black problem here."
Tak suddenly sat forward and put his worn, leather elbows on the
table. "You're telling me? What I want to know is how you're going to
do anything about it sitting up there on Brisbain Avenue?"
"I'm not at Calkins' any more. I've moved back to Jackson. Down
home again."
"Have you now? Well, how did your stay work out?"
"Hell-I guess it was nice of him to invite me. I had a good time. He
has quite a place up there. We got into a couple of talks. Pretty good, I
think. He's an amazing man. But with that constant weekend bash
going, thirty-eight days a month it looks like, I don't know how he has
time to take a leak, much less write half a newspaper everyday, and run
whats left of the God-damn town. I outlined a couple of ideas: a switchboard, a daycare center, a house-inspection program. He say he wants
to cooperate. I believe him ... as much as you can believe anybody,
today. Since there's as little control around here as there is, I wouldn't
be surprised if he gets mOre done than you'd expect, you know?"
Tak turned his hands up on the ,table. "Just remember, nobody voted
him up there.'
Fenster sat forward too. "I've never been that down on dictators.
Long as they didn't dictate me." He laughed and! drank more beer.
Brandy sips dropped in hot knots to Kidd's stomach and untied. He
moved his leg away from Tak's. "Did you talk to him about that Harrison article?" Kidd asked Fenster.
"George Harrison?D
"Yeah.'"
"Hell, that's just a whole lot of past noise. There're real problems that
have to be dealt with now. Have you ever walked up Jackson Avenue?"
284 Dhalgren
"'I've crossed it. tl
"Well, take a good look around it, talk to the people who live there
before you go on to me about any of that George Harrison horseshit."
"Paul here doesn't approve of George." Tak nodded deeply. •
"1 don't approve or disapprove.» Fenster clioked his bottle on the
wood. "Sadism simply isn't my bag. And 1 don't hold with anybody
committing rape on anybody. But if you want to associate with him,
that's your problem, not mine. 1 think making all that to.do over it is
the worst sort of red·herring."
"If you're back down on Jackson, then you got him for a nextdoor
neighbor; so you're more or less stuck with associating with him, huh?
1 just have to be friendly in the bar." Suddenly Tak slapped the table
edge: "You know what the problem is, Paul? George is nicer than you."
"Huh?D
"No, 1 mean: I know you both, 1 like you both. But 1 like George
more." .
"Hell, man, 1 see those posters Reverend Amy's giving out. 1 know
what you guys in here like-"
"No,71 Tak said. "No, you're missing the point."
"Like hell 1 am-Hey. you know?" Fenster turned to Kidd. "Have
you ever read those articles, the ones in the issue about the riot, and
the o\her issue with the interview?"
"Huh? No, but 1 heard about them."
"Took hasn't read them either.»
"I've heard enough about them," Tak echoed.
"But here's ,the point. Everybody's heard about the articles. But since
I've been here, I've only talked to one person who actually says he read
them."
"Who?" Tak asked.
"George Harrison." Fenster sat back and looked satisfied.
Kidd tilted his brandy. "I met somebody who read them."
"Yeah?" Fenster asked. "Who?"
"The girl he screwed. And her family. Only they didn't recognire
her in the pictures." From something that happened on Fenster's face
without destroying the smile, Kidd decided maybe Fenster wasn't so
bad after all.
"You met her? n
"Yeah." Kidd drank. "You probably will too. Everybody keeps telling
me how small the city is. Hey. Tak, thanks for the drink." He started
to stand.
In Time of Plague 285
Tak said, "You sure you're all right, Kidd?"
"Yeah. I feel better." He nodded at Fenster, then walked, relieved, to
the bar.
WbenJacksaid, "Hey. how you doing?" Kiddstarted. His .elief, the
shallowest of things, vanished.
"Hello,D he said. IIFine. How you been?Jl
"I been fine." Jack's shirt was wrinkled, his eyes red, his cheeks un·
shaven. He looked very happy. "I just been fine. How are And
your girl friend?"
"l'mfine," Kidd repeated, nodding. "She's fine."
Jack laughed. "Tbatl; great. Yeah, that's really great. Say. 1 want you
to meet a friend of mine. This is Frank." Jack stepped back.
"Hello." With a high, bald forehead and neck-length hair, Frank had
apparently decided to grow a beard perhaps a week ago: I give them to
you crossed, I take them uncrossed . .. yes, tbat was who it was. Only he
had put on a green shirt with milky snaps instead of buttons; and
washed his hands.
"This," Jack explained to Frank, "is the friend of Tak's 1 was telling
you about who writes the poems. Only 1 can't remember his name."
"Kidd," Kidd said.
"Yeah, they call him the Kid." Jack continued his explanation. "Kid,
this is Frank. Frank was in the army. and he writes poems too. 1 was
te1ling him all about you, before. Wasn't n"
"Yeah, I've seen you around the park." Frank nodded. "Jack was
telling me you were a poet?"
Kidd shrugged. "Yeah. A little."
"We been drinking," Jack continued /lis explanation, "all after-
"And it's night now.' Frank grinned.
"This God-damn city. If you wanna stay drunk, it sure is the place
to come. You can buy drinks at the God-damn bars and you don't have
to pay no money. Or anything. And anyplace you go, people always got
stuff to smoke Or to drink. Jesus." He burped. "1 gotta go water the garden. Be back in a minute." He stepped away and headed for the john.
Kidd felt a wave of disorientation, but the phrases he'd prepared before broke through: ·You been looking out for nature boy?"
"He's sort of looking out for me," Frank said. ·We're both army
deserters. Him, a little more .ecently. Only I think Jack's getting
homesick. II
Kidd swallowed. "For the army?" And relt better.
286 Dhalgrtn
Frank nodded. "I'm nollleft about six months ago. Happy I'm here.
I'm getting a chance to write again, and it's a pretty together place."
"You,' and at the reiteration he felt t<lward Frank sudden, surprising, and total distrust, "write poems?" So he smiled.
Frank smiled back and nodded over his glass: "Well, I've been sort
of lucky about getting things published, rea:lly. The rook was just an
accident. One of the west coast little magazines puts out good editions
of people who contribute. I was lucky enough to get selected."
"You mean you have a book?"
"No copies in Bellona." Frank nodded. "Uke 1 said, even ,that was
an atCident. n
"You been writing a long time, then."
"Since I was fIfteen or sboteen. 1 started in high school; and most of
what you write back then is crap."
"How old are you now?"
"Twenty-five."
"Then you've been one for a long time. A poet. I mean it's your job,
your profession."
Frank laughed. "You caR't make a living at it. I taught fo. a year at
San Ftancisco State, till I went into the army. I like to think of it as a
profession, though."
Kidd nodded. "You got a lot of poems in magazines and things?"
"Three in the New Yorher about a yearago. S<>me people thinkthat's
my crowning achievement. Two in Poetry. Chicago, before that. There're
a few others. But those are the ones I'm proud of."
"Yeah, I used to read that magazine a loc. "
"You did?" .
"It's the one that used to have the little curlicue horse a long time
ago? Now it just has funny pictutes OIait.l read it every month in the
library; at school. For years."
Frank laughed. "Then you're doing better than lam."
"heen the New Yorker," Kidd said. "But I nevenead it."
frank's expression changed slightly and noncommittally.
"And I've never published any poems at all," Kidd said. "Anyplace.
I've only been a poet a little while. A 'couple of weeks. Since I came
here. You probably know a lot more about it than I do."
"About getting things published?"
"That too. I mean about writing them, ,though. It's hard."
"Yes, I guess it can be.7I
"It's about the God-damned hardest thing I've ever done."
In Time of Plague 287
Frank laughed and rubbed his young beard. "s<>metimes. You've ...
only been writing-poelns, for a few weeks? What made you start?"
"I don't know: What made you?"
"I suppose,' and Frank nodded again, "I had to."
"Do you-" Kidd paused a moment, consideriog the the£t-"do you
find Bellona stimulating, Inaking you produce work?"
"About as much as anyplace else, I guess. Maybe a little less, because
you have to spend so much time seuming, you know? 1 was working
On a few short things. But 1 lost my notebook a rew weeks back.'
"Huh?"
Frank nodded. "Since then I haven't written anything. 1 haven't had
time. ft
. "Hey, you lost your notebookl" Discomfort broached fear. "Christ,
,that must be ... " Then his feelings centered. Kidd leaned over the bar.
"Hey, can I get the notebook! Huh? Come ani You want {O give me the
noteoook, please'"
• All right," the bartender said .• All right, I'll get it. Simmer down.
You guys ready for another-'
"The notebook'" Kidd knocked the counter with his fist.
"All right'" Sucking his teeth, the bartender puRed itIrom the cage
and flopped it on the bar. "Now do you want another driok?"
MOho Yeah," Kidd said. ·Sure."
Besides blood, urine, mulch, and bum marks, there were rings from
the bottles he had set haphazardly on the cover. He opened it in the
middle. " .. . This isn't yours, is it?ft
Frank frowned. 'You found this?"
"Yeah. It waS in ,the park."
Geoff Rivers
Kit Darhfeather
David Wise ...
Arthur Pearson
Earlton Rudolph
Phillip Edwards . ..
Kidd looked over Frank's shoulder and read the listed names, till
Frank tutned the page.
"Hey, what you doin'J" Jack said behiBd them. 'You showing Frank
here your poetry writing?"
Kidd turned around. "Just this notebook I found, filled up with
somebodys journal."
"Frank's pretty smart." Jack nodded. "He knows about all sorts of
shit. He taught history. In a college. And he cut out on the army too."
288 Dhalgrm
"Lots of us have: Frank said, not looking up. "The ones with any
sense go to Canada. The rest of uS end up here." He turned a page.
"You been having a good time?" Jack put his hand on Kidd's shoulder. "This is the place to have a good time, you know?"
"Fine time," Kidd said. "But I haven't seen you around. Where you
been staying?"
"Stayed on a few days with Tak." Jack's hand rose and fell. "He
kicked me out after a week when I wouldn't let him suck on my peter
nomore.tI
Across the bar Loufer, his cap low on his ears, still talked earnestly
with Fenster.
jack's hand fell again. "They got girls in this city! Frank knows this
whole house. Full of girls. Real nice girls. We was over there, and ...•
His grin widened toward ecstasy. "They like Frank a lot." He screwed
up his face. "I think that's 'cause he's growin' a beard and things. Or
maybe taught in a college."
"They liked you okay,· Frank said, still not looking up. "They just
didn't know you."
"Yeah, I guess they just didn't know me well. enough, yet."
"Say?" Frank looked up now. "You wrote aU this-?"
"Yeah-well, no. I mean most of it was written in there when 1
found it. That's why I wanted to know if it was yours."
Frank said. "No.lt'snotmine."
Kidd turned from under Jack's hand. "That'S good. Because when
you said you had lost your notebook, you know; 1 just thought ...•
"Yeahl n Frank said. "I see. Jl
"We're gonna go out and look for some more girls," Jack said. "You
wanna come along?"
"Jack thinks theres safety in numbers: Frank said.
"No. No, that's not it: Jack protested. "I just thought he might want
to come and help us look for some girls. That's all. Maybe we can go
back to that house?"
"Hey, thanks: Kidd said. "But I got to hang around here for a
while."
"The Kidd heres got his own old lady," Jack said in knowing explanation. "I bet hes waiting on her.·
"Hey, I'm .. _ sorry it's not your notebook,' Kidd told Frank.
"Yeah: Frank said. "So am 1."
"We see you around," Jack said, while Kidd (smiling, nodding)
wondered at Frank's tone.
In Time of Plague 289
Absently rubbing the paper (he could feel the pen's blind impressions), he watched them leave.
Bumping shoulders with Ihem, Ernest Newboy came into the bar.
Newboy paused, pulling his suit jacket hem, looked around, saw Fenster, saw Kidd, and came toward Kidd.
Kidd sat up a little straighter.
"Hello, there. How've you been for the past few days?"
The small triumph prompted Kidds grin. To hide it he looked back
at the book. The poem Frank had left shOwing, had been tentatively
titled:
l.OUFER
In the margin, he had noted alternates: The Red Wolf, The Fire Wolf,
The Iron Wolf. "Eh ... fine.· Suddenly, and deCisively, he took his pen
from the vest's upper button hole, crossed out LOUFER and wrote
above it: WOLF BRINGER. He looked up at Newboy. "I real fine;
lInd working a lot too."
"Thats good," Newboy picked up the gin and tonic; the bartender
left "Actually I was hoping I'd run into you tonight. It has to do with
a conversation I had with Roger."
"Mr Calkins?·
"We were out haVing after-dinner brandy in the October gardens
and I was telling him about your poems." Newboy paused a moment
for a reaction but got none. "He was very impressed with what I told
him."
"How could he be impressed? He didn't read them.·
doffed his gin. "Perhaps what impressed him was my descnpnon, well as the fact that-how shall I say it? Not that they are
about the city here-Bellona. Rather, Bellona provides, in the ones I
recall best at any rate, the which allow the poems to ... take
place." The slightest questioning at the end of Newboy's sentence
asked for corroboration.
More to have him continue tban to corroborate, Kidd nodded.
"It furnishes the decor, as well as a certain mood or concern. Or am
[ being too presumptuous?"
"Huh? No, II
. "At any Roger brought up the idea: Why not ask the young man
If he would like to have them printed?"
"Huh? No, sure." Though the punctuation was the same, each word
liad a completely dilierent length, emphasis, and inflection. "I mean,
290 Dhalgren
that would be ... " A grin split the tensions binding his face. "But he
hasn't seen them! n
"I pointed that out. He said he was deferring to my enthusiasm.·
"You were that enthusiastic? He just wants to put some of them in
his newspaper, maybe?-
"Another suggestion I made. No, he wants to print them up in a
book, and distribute them in the city. He wants me to get copies of the
poems from you, and a title.'
The sound was all bFeath expelling. Kidd drew his hand back along
the counter. His heart pounded loudly, irregularly, and though he didnt
think he was sweating, he felt a drop run the small of his back, pause
at the chain-"You must have been pretty enthusiastic-" and roll on.
Newboy turned to his drink. "Since Roger made the suggestion, and
I gather you would like to go along with it, let me be perfectly honest:
I enjoyed looking over your poems, I enjoyed your reading them to me;
they have a sort oflanguage that, from looking at the way you revise,
at any rate, you've apparently done quite a bit of work to athieve. But
I haven't lived with them by any means long enough to decide whether
they are, for want ofa simple term, good poems. It's very possible that
if I just picked them up in a book store, and read them over, read them
over very carefully too, I might easily not find anything in them at all
that interested me."
Kidd frowned.
"You say you've only been writing these for a few weeks?"
Kidd nodded, still frOwning.
"That's quite amazing. Howald are you?"
"Now there." Mr Newboy pulled back. "I would have thought you
were much, much younger. I would have assumed you were ahout
nineteen or eighteen and had worked most of your life in the country."
"No. I'm twenty-seven and I've worked all over, city, country, on a
ship. What's that got to do with it?-
"AbsolutelYJlathing." Newboy laughed and drank. "Nothing at all.
I've only met you a handful of times, and it would be terribly presumptuous of me to think I knew you, but frankly wkat I've been
thinking about is how something like this would be for you. Twentyse'V"en ••. ?71
"I'd like it."
"Very good.' Newboy smiled. "And the decision I've come to is, simply, that so litde poetry is published in the world it would in behoove
In Time of Plague 291
me to stand in the way of anyone who wants to publish more. Your
being older than I thought actually makes it easier. I don't feel quite as
responsible. You understand, I'm not really connected with the whole
business. The idea came from Mr Calkins. Don't let Ihis make you
think ill of me, but for a while I tried to dissuade him."
"Because you didn't think the poems were good enough?"
"Because Roger is not in the business of publishing poetry. Often
unintentionally, he ends up in the business of sensationalism. Sensationalism and poetry have nothing to do with one another. But then,
your poems are not sensational. And I don't think he wants to make
themso. n
·You know, I was just talking to another poet, I mean somebody
who's been writing a long time, and with a book and everything. Hes
got poems in Poetry. And that other magazine ... the New Yorker.
Maybe MT Calkins would like to see some of his stuff lOa?"
"I don't think so," Mr Newboy said. "And if I have one objection to
the whole business, I suppose that's it. What would you like for the
name of your book?"
The muscles in Kidd's back tightened almost to pain. As he relaxed
them, he felt the discomfort in the gut that was emblematic affear. His
mind was sharp and glittery. He was as aware of the two men in leather
talking in the corner, the woman in construction boots coming from
the mens room, of Fenster and Loufer still in thetr baolh, of the bartender leaning on the towel against the ba-r, as he was of Newboy. He
pulled the notebook into his lap and looked down at it. After the count
of seven he looked up and said, "I want to call. it-Brass Orchids."
"Again?n
"Brass Orchids."
"No 'The' or anything?»
"That's right. Just: Brass Orchids,"
"That's very nice. I like that. 1-" Then Newboy's expression
changed; he laughed. "That really is nice! And you've got quite a sense
of humor!"
"Yeah," Kidd said. ·Cause I think it takes some balls for me to pull
off some shit like that. 1 mean, mewith a book of poems?- He laughed
too.
"Yes, I do like that,' Newboyrepealed. "r hope it all works out well.
Maybe my hesitations will prove unfounded after all. And any time you
want to get us copies of the poems, in the next few days, that'll be fine."
"Sure."
292 Dhalgren
Newboy picked up his glass. "rm goiug to talk to Paul Fenster over
there for a while. He left Roger's today and fd like to say hello. Will
YOll exC.use me?lt
"Yeah." Kidd nodded after Newboy.
He at his notebook again. With his thumb, he nudged the
clip on the pen out of the spiral where he had stuck it, and sat looking
at the cover: click-click, click-click, click.
He lettered across the cardboard: Brass Orchids. And could hardly
read it for dirt.
Brushing to the final pages (pausiug at the poem called "Elegy" to
read two liues, then hurrying past), he felt a familiar sensation: at Ihe
page where he'd been writing before, listening for a rhythm from his
iuner voice, he turned to strain the inner babbleIt hit like pain, was pain; knotted his belly and pushed all air from
his lungs, so ,that he rocked on the stool and clutched the counter. He
looked around (only his eyes were closed) taking small gulps. All iuside vision blaDked at images of glory, inevitable and ineffably sensuous
till he sat, grinning and opened mouthed and panting, fingers pressing
the paper. He tore his eyelids apart, the illusory seal, and looked down
at the notebook. He picked up the pen aDd hastily wrote two lines till
he balked at an unrevealed nOun. Re-reading made him shake and he
began automatically crossing out words before he could trace the thread
of meaning from sOlmd to image: he didn't want to feel the chains. They
drew across him and stung.
They carried pain and no solution for pain.
And iucorrectly labeled it something else.
He wrote more words (not even sure what the last five were) when
once more his back muscles sickled, his stomach tapped the bar edge,
and inside the spheres of his eyes, something blind and luminous and
terrifyiug happened.
Those women, he thought, those men who read me iu a hundred
years will ... and no predicate fixed the fantaSy. He shook his head and
choked. Gasping, he tried to read what he had set down, and felt his
hand move to X the banalites that leached all energy: " ... pit ... '
There was a word (a verb!), and watched those either side suddenly
take its focus and lose all battliDg force, till it was only flabby, and archaic. Write: he moved his hand (remember, he tried to remember, that
squiggle is the letters ". _ . tr ... " when you go to copy this) and put
down letters that approximated the sounds gnawing his longue root.
"Awnnn . .. ' was the sound gushing from his nose.
In Time of Plague 293
Someday I am going to ... it came this lime with light; and the
fear from the park, the recollections of all fear that stained and stained
like time and page, pen, and counter obliterated. }iis heart
pounded, his nose ran; he wiped his nose, tried to re-read. What was
that squiggle that left the word between " ... reason ... " and " ...
pain ... " indecipherable?
The pen, which had dropped, rolled off the counter and fell. He
heard it, but kept blinking at his scrawl. He picked the notebook up,
fumbled the cover closed, and the floor, hitting his feet, jarred him forward. "MrNewboy ... !"
Newboy, standing by the booth, turned. ", .. yes?" His expression
grew strange.
"Look, you take this." Kidd thrust the notebook out. "You take this
now ... n
Newboy caught it when he let it go. "Well, all right-"
"You take it: Kidd repeated, "I'm finished with it .. ," He realized
how hard he was breathing. "I mean I think I'm finished wilh it now
... so-" Tak looked up from his seat-"you can take it with you.
Now.'ll
Newboy nodded. "All right." After a slight pause, he pursed his
lips: "Well, Paul. It was good seeing you. I'd hoped you'd have gotten
up again. You must come sometime soon, before I leave. I've really enjoyed the talks we've had, They've opened up a great deal to me.
You've told me a great deal, shown me a great dea-!, about this city,
about this oountry. Bellona's been very good for me.' He nodded
Tak. "Good meeting you." He looked once more al Kidd, who only realized the expression was concern as Newboy-with notebook
under his arm-was walking away.
Tak patted the seat beside him.
Kidd started to sit; halfway, his legs gave and he fell.
"Another hot brandy for the kid herel" Tak hollered, so loud people looked. To Fenster's frown, Tak simply shook his grimacing head:
"He's okay. Just had a rough day. You okay, kid?"
Kidd swallowed, and did feel a little better. He wiped his forehead
(damp), and nodded.
"Uke I was saying," Tak continued, as blond arms with iuky leopards set Kidd a steaming glass, "for me, it's a matter of soul." He observed Fenster across his knuckles, continuing from the interruption.
"Essentially, 1 have a black soul."
Fenster looked from the exiting Newbo:y. "Hum?"
294 Dhalgr""
"My soul is black," 1ak reiterated. "You know wbat black soul is?"
"Yeah, 1 know what black soul is. And Ilk« hell you do."
Takshook his head. "1 don't think you understand-"
"You can't have one/' Fenster said. 14rm black You're white. You
can't have a black soul. 1 say so."
Loufer shook his head. "Most of the time you corne on pretty white
to me.U
"Scares you I can imitate you that well?" Fenster picked up his beer,
then put the bottle back down. "What is it that all you white men suddenly want to be-"
"1 do, not want to be black.'
gives you'a black sou!?"
"Alienation. The whole gay thing, for one."
"Thats a passport to a whole area of culture and the arts you fall into
just by falling into bed," Fenster countered. "Being black is an automatic
cutoff from that same area unless you do Some fairly fancy toe-in-thedoor work." Fenster sucked at his teeth. "Being a faggot does nat make
you black!"
Tak put his hands down on top of one another. 'Oh, all right-"
"You," Fenster announced to partial retreat, "haven't
wanted a black soul for three hundred years. What the hell is it that's
happened in the last Uueen that makes you think you can appropriateitnow?"
"Shit.' Tak spread his fingers. "You take anything from me you
want-ideas, mannerisms, properlY; and money. And 1 can't take anything from you?"
"That you dan:-" FellSterS e.yes narrowed-"express, to me, stu''''
prise or indignation or hurt (notice I do not include anger), because that
is exactly what the situation is, is why you have no black soul." Suddenly he stood-the red collar rell open from the dark clavicle-and
shook his finger. "Now you live like that for ten generations, then COme
and ask me for some black soul.· The finger. pale nail Qn da<k flesh,
jutted. "You can have a black soul when. I tel! you you can bave one!
Now don't bug me! I gotlll go peel" He pulled away from the booth.
Kidd sat, his fiRgertips tingling, his knees miles away. his mind so
open that each statement in the alterealion had seemed a comment to
and/or about him. He sat trying to integrate them, while their import
slipped from the tables Qf memory. TaklUtned to him with a grunt,
and with his forefioger hooked down the visor of his cap. "I have
the feeling-" Tak nodded deeply- "that in my relentless battle for
In Time of Plague 295
white supremacy I have, yet Once again, been bested." He screwed up
his face. °He's a good man, you know? Go on, drink some of that. Kid,
I worry aoout you. How you feeling now?"
"Funny," Kidd said. "Strange ... okay; I guess.» He drank. His breath
stayed in the top ofhls lungs. Something dark and sloppy rilled beneath.
"Pushy; self-righteous." Tak was looking acrOss to where Fenster
had been sitting. "You'd think he was aJew. But a good man."
"You met him on his fIrst day here too," Kidd said. "You ever ball
him?"
"Huh?" Tak laughed. "Not on your life. I doubt he puts out for any
one except his wife. If he has one. And even there one wonders. Anyplace he's ever gone, I'll bet he's gotten there over the fallen bodies of
love-sick faggots. Well, it's an education, on both sides. Hey are you
sure you didn't take some pill you shouldn't have, or something like
that? Think back.'
"No, really. I'm alt right DOW."
"Maybe you want to come to my place, where it's a little warmer,
and I can keep an eye on you."
"No, I'm gonna wait for Lanya." Kidd's own thoughts, still brittle
and hectic, Were rattling so hard it was not till fifteen seconds later,
when Fenster returned to the table, he realized Tak had said nothing
more, and was merely looking at the candlelight on the brandy.
Voiding his bladder had quenched Fenster's heat. As he sat down,
he said quite moderately; "Hey, do you see what I was trying to-"
Tak halted him with a raised finger. "TaucM, man. Touchf. Now
dOn't bug me. I'm thinking about it. "
"All right.' Fenster was appeased. ·Okay." He sat back and looked
at all the bottles in front of him. "After this much to drink, it's all anybody can ask.' H. began to thumb away the label.
But Tak was still silent.
"Kidd-?"
YLanya!"
2
Wind sprang in the leaves, waking her; waking him beneath her turning head, her moving hand. Memories clung to him, waking, like
weeds, like words: They had talked, they had walked, they had made
love, they had gotten up and walked again-there'd been little talk that
time because tears kept rising behind his eyes to drain away into his
296 Dhalgren
nose, leaving wet lids, sniffies, but dry cheeks. They had come back,
lay down, made love again, and slept.
Taking up some conversation whose beginnings were snarled in
bright, nether memories, she said: "YOli really can't remember where
you went, or what happened?" She had given him time to rest; she
was pressing again. "One minute you were at the commune, the next
you were gone. Don't you have any idea what happened between the
time we got to the park and lime Tak found you wandering around
outside-Tak said it must have been three hours later, at least!" He remembered talking with her, with Tak in the bar; finally he had just
listened to her and Tak talk to each other. He ,couldn't seem to understand.
Kidd said, because it was the only thing he could think: "This is the
first time I've seen real wind here." Leaves passed over his face. "The
first time. H
She Sighed, her mouth settling against his throat.
He tried to pull the corner of the blanket across his shoulders, grunted because it wouldn't come, lifted one shoulder: it came.
The astounded eye of leaves opened over them, turned, and passed.
He pulled his lips back, squinted at the streaked dawn. Dun, dark, and
pearl twisted beyond the branches, wrinkled, folded back on itself, but
would not tear.
She rubhed his shoulder; he turned his face up against hers, opened
his mouth, closed it, opened it again.
"What is it? Tell me what happened? Tell me what it is."
"I'm going ... I maybe flipping out. That\; what it is, you know?"
But he was rested: things were less bright, more clear. "' don't knOw.
But! may be ... "
She shook her head, not in but wonder. He reached between
her legs where her hair was still swive-sticky. rubbed strands of it betWeen his fingers. Her thighs made a movement to open, then to clamp
him still. Neither motion achieved, she brushed her face against his
hair. "Can you talk to me about it. Tak\; right-you looked like you
Were drugged or something! I can tell you were scared. Try to talk to
me, will you?"
"Yeah, yeah, I ..• " Against her flesh, he giggled. "I can still screw."
'Well, a lot, and I love it. But even that\; sort of ... sometimes like
instead of talking."
"In my head, words are going on all the time, you know?"
"What are they? Tell me what they say."
In Time of Plague 297
He nodded and swallowed. He had tried to tell her everything important, about the Richards, about Newboy. He said, "That scratch ... "
"What?" she asked his lingering silence.
"Did I say anything?"
"You said, 'The scratch.ln
"I couldn't tell ... " He began to shake his head. "I couldn't tell if I
said it out loud."
"Go on," she said. "What scratch?"
"John, he cut Millys leg."
"Huh?"
"Taks got an orchid, a real fancy one, out of brass. John got hold of
it, and just for kicks, he cut her leg. It was ... " He took another breath.
"Awful. She had a cut there before. I don't know, I guess he gets his
rocks off that way. I can understand that. But he cut-"
"Goon."
"Shit, it doesn't make any sense when I talk about it."
"Goon."
"Your legs, you don't have any cut on them." He let the breath out;
and could feel her frowning down in her chest. "But he cut hers."
"This was something you saw?"
"She was standing up. And he was sitting down. And suddenly he
reached over and just slashed down her leg. Probably it wasn't a very
big cut. He'd done it before. Maybe to someone else. Do you think he
ever did it to anyone else-?"
"I don't know. Why did it upset you?"
"Yes •.. no, I mean. I was already upsel. I mean because ... " He
shook his head. "I don't know. It's like theres something very important I can' t remember.:n
"Your name?"
"I don't even ... know if thats it. It's just-very confusing."
She kept rubbing till he reached up and stopped her hand.
She said: "I don't know what 10 do. I wish I did. Something\; hap·
pening to you. It's not prelty to walch. I don't know who you are, and
I like you a 101. That doesn't make it easier. You've Slopped working
for ,the Richards; I'd hoped that would take some pressure 01I. Maybe
you should JUSt go away; I mean you should leave ..• "
In the1eaves, thewind walked up loudly. But it was his shaking head
that stopped he" Loudly wind walked away.
"What were they ... why were they all there? Why did you take me
there?"
298 Dhalgren
"Huh? When?'"
"Why did you take me there tonight?"
"To the commune?"
"But you see, you bad a reason, only I can't understand what it was.
It wouldn't even matter," He rubbed her cheek untU she caught his
thumb between her lips. "It wouldn't matter." DiITused anxiety hardened bim and he began to press and press again at her thigh.
"Look, 1 only took you there because-· and theloud wind and his
own mind's tumbling blotted it. When he shook his head and could
hear again, she was stroking his thick bair and mumbling, "Shhhhh . ..
Try and relax. Try and rest now, just a little ... " With her other hand,
she pulled the rougb blanket up. The ground was hard under shoulder
and elbow:
He propped himself on them while tbey numbed, and tried Out
memory.
Suddenly he turned 10 face her. "Look, you keep trying to help, but
what do you ... ' He felt all language sunder Oil silence.
'But what do 1 really feel about all this?' sbe saved him. 'I don't
know-no, 1 do." She Sighed. "Lots of it isn't too nice. Maybe you're
in really bad shape, and since l've only known you for a little while, 1
should get out now: Then 1 Hey, l'm into a really good thing; if
1 worked just a little barder I migbt be able to do something that would
belp. Sometimes, I just feellbat you've made m. feel very good-that
one burts most. lIecause 1 look at you and 1 see bow much you hurt
and 1 can't think of anything to do."
"He ... ' be dredged from flooded ruins, "I ... don't know:" He
wished she would ask what he meant by "h.: but sbe only sighed on
his shoulder. He said, "I don't want to scare you."
She said, "I think you do. I mean, it's hard not to think you're just
trying to get back at me for something somebody else did to you. And
that's awful."
fC.AmI?"
"Kidd, wben you're off someplace:, working, or wandering around,
what do you remember when you remember me?"
Heshrugged. "A lot of tltis. A lot of holding each other; and talking.'
"Yeah: and he heard a smile shape h.r voiCe, "which is a lot of the
most beautiful part, lIut we do other things. Remember those too. ThaI's
cruel of me to ask when you're going through this, isn't it? But theres SO
much you don't see. You walk around in a world with holes in it; you
stumble into them; and get hurt. ThaIS cruel to say. but its bard to watch.'
In Time of Plague 299
"No." He Crowned at the long dawn. "When we went up to see Newboy, did you Iike-" and remembered her ruined dress wbile he said:
"At Calkins'--did you have fun?"
She laughed. 'You didn't?" Her laugh died.
Still, he felt her smile pressed on his shoulder. "It was strange. For
me. It's easy sometimes to Corget I've got anything t<> do other than ...
well, this."
"You talked about an art teacher once. I remember that. And the
tape editing and the teaching. You paint too?"
"Years ago: she countered. "When 1 was seventeen I had a scholarship to the ATt Students' League in New York, five, six years back. 1
, don't paInt now. I don't want to.lI
"Why'd you stop?"
"Would you like to hear the story? BaSically, because I'm very lazy."
She shrugged in his arms. "I JUSt drifted away from it. When 1 was drifting, I was very worried for a while. My parents bated the idea oC my
living in New York. 1 bad just left Sarah Lawrence-again-and they
wanted me to stay with a family. But 1 was sharing an awful apartment
on Twenty-Second Street with two other girls and going pMt time to
the League. My parents thought 1 was quite mad and were very happy
when I waatedto go to a psychiatrist about my 'painting block.' They
thought he would keep me from doing anything really foolish.' She
barked a one-syllable laugh .• After a whUe, he said what 1 should d<> is
set myself a project. I was to make myself paint three hours ,each daypaint anything, il didn't matter. 1 was t<> keep track ·of ,the ,time in a litde twenty-five cent pad. And for every minute under ,three hours 1 didn't
paint, 1 had to spend six times that amount of time doing something 1
didn't tike-it was washing dishes, yes. We had decided that I had a
phobia against painting, and my shrink was behaviorist. He was going
to set up a counter unpleasantness-"
·You bad a phobia about dishwashing too?"
"Anyway." She frowned at him in the near dark. "I leCt his office in
the morning and got started that afternoon. I was very excited. 1 Celt 1
might get into all sorts of areas of my unconscious in my painting that
way ... wbatever that meant. I didn't fall behind until the third day.
And then only twentyminules. But 1 couldn't bring myself to do two
hours oC dishwashing.·
"How many dishes did you have?"
"I was supposed to wash clean ones if 1 ran out of dirty ones. Tbe
next day 1 was okay. Only I didn't like the painting tbat was coming
300 Dhalgren
out. The day after that I don't think I painted atall. That's right, somebody came over and we went up to Poe's Cottage."
"Ever been to Robert Louis Stevenson's house in Monterey?"
"No.n
"He only rented a room in it for a couple of months .and finally got
thrown out because he couldn't pay the rent. Now they call it StevenHouse and it's a museum all about him."
She laughed. "Anyway, I was supposed to See the doctor the next
day. And report on how it was going. That night I started looking at
the paintings-I took them out because I thought I might make up
some work time. Then I began to see how awful they were. Suddenly
I got absolutely furious. And tore them up-two big ones, a little one,
and about a dozen draWings I'd done. Into lots of pieces. And threw
them away. 'J.1hen I washed every dish in the house. n
"Shit ... " He frowned at the top of her head.
"I ,think I did some dtawing after that, but that's more or less when
I really stopped pamting. I reaHzed something though-"
"You shouldn't have done that," he mterrupted. "That was awful."
"It was years ago," she said. "It was sort of childish. But 1-"
"It frightens me."
She looked at him. "It was years ago.' Her face was greyed in the
grey dawn. "It was." She turned away. and conooued. "But I realized
something. About art. And psychiatry. They're both self-perpetuating systems. Like religion. All three of them promise you a sense of
inner wonh and meanmg, and spend a lot of time telling you about
the suffering you have to go through to achieve it. As soon as you get
a problem in anyone of them, the solution it gives is always to go
deeper into the same system. They're all in a rather uneasy truce with
one another in what's actually a mortal battle. Like an self-remfotting
systems. At best, each is trying to encompass the other two and define them as sub-groups. You know: religion and art are both forms
of madness and madness is the realm of psychiatry. Or, art is the
study and praise of man and man's ideals, so therefore a religiOUS experience becomes just a brutaIized aesthetic response and psychiatry
is JUSt another tool for the artist to observe man an:d render his portraits more accurately. And the IeHgious attitude I guess is that the
other two are only useful as long as promote the good life. At
worst, they all try to destroy one another. Which is what my psychiatrist, whether he knew it or not, was trying, quite effectively. to do
to my painting. I gave up psychiatry too, pretty soon. I just didD.' t
want to get all wound up in any systems at all.'
In Time of Plague 301
"You like washlng dishes?"
"I haven't had to in a long, long time." She shrugged again. "And
when I have to now, actually I find it rather relaxing."
He laughed. "I guess I do too." Then: "But you shonldn't have torn
up those paintings. I mean, suppose you chaoged your mind. Or maybe
there was something good in them that you could have used later-"
"It was bad if I wanted to be an artist. But I wasn't an artist. I didn't
want to be.1l
'You got a scholarship."
"So did a lot of other people. Their paintings were terrible, mostly.
By the laws of chance, mine were probably terrible too. No, it wasn't
bad if I didn't want to paint at all.'
But he was still shaking his head.
"That really upsets you, doesn't it? Why?"
He took a br.ath and moved his arm from under her. "It's like
everything you-anybody says to me ... it's like they're trying to tell
me a hundred and fIfty other things as well. Besides what they're saying
direct.n
"Oh, perhaps I am, just a bit."
"I mean, here I am, hall nuts and trying to write poems, and you're
trying to tell me I shouldn't put my faith in art or psychiatry.'
"Oh no!" Shefolded her hands on his chest, and put her chin there.
"I'm saying I decided not to. But I wasn't nuts. I was just lazy. There is
a difference, I hope. And I wasn't an ar,tist. A tape editor, a teacher, a
harmonica player, but not an arlist." He folded his arms across her neck
and pushed her head nat to its cheek. "I suppose the problem,". she
went on, mulled in his armpit, "is that we have an inside and an outside. We've got problems both places, but it's so hard to tell where the
one stops and the other takes up.' She paused a moment, moving her
head. "My blue dress ...•
"That reminds you of the problem with the outside?"
"That, and going up to Calkins'. I don't mind living like that-every
onCe in a while. When I've had the chance, I've always done it rather
well. "
"We could have a place like Calkins'. You can have anything you
want in this city. Maybe it wouldn't be as big, but we could fmd a nice
house; and I could get stuff like everybody else does. Tak's got an electric stove that cooks a roast beef in ten mmutes. With microwaves. We
could have any thing-"
"That-' she was shaking her head-"however, is when the inside
problems start. Or start to become problems, anyway. Sometimes, I
302 Dhalgren
don't think I have any inside problems at alL I think I'm just giving
myseU something to worry about. I'm not scared of half the things half
the people I know are. I've gone lots of places, met lots of people, had
lots of fun. Maybe .t is all a matter of getting the outside problems
solved. Another not nice thing: When I look at you, sometimes I don't
think I have a right to think I have any problems, inside or out."
"Don't you want to do anything? Change anything; preserve anything; find any ... " He stopped because he felt distioctly uncomfortable.
"No.· She said it very fIrmly.
"I mean, maybe that would make it easier to solve some of the Outside problems, anyway. You know, maybe you'd feel happier if you
could get another dress.·
"No," she repeated. "I want wonderful and fascinating and marvelous things to happen to me and I don't want to do anything to make
them happen. Nothing at all. I suppose that makes you think I'm a superfiCial person ... np, you're too intelligent. But a lot of people
would."
He was confused. "You're a marvelous, deep, faSCinating person," he
said, "and therefore you should be world-famous this instant.'
"For twenty-three, I'm famous enough, considering I haven't done
anything. But you're right.'
"How are Y01:1' famous?rI
"Oh, not really famous. I just have lots ·of famous friends." She
rolled her head Once more to her chin. "It said in that article that Newboy had been nominated three times for Ihe Nobel Prize. I know three
people who've actually won it·
"Huh?!!
"Two in the sciences, and Lester Pearson was a good friend of my
uncle and would come spend weeks with us at my uncles summer
place in Nova Scotia. The one in chemiStry was very pleasant-he was
only twenty-nin_and connected with the university. We were very
close for awhile.'
"You went out on dates and things. With aU your famous friends?"
"No, I hate that I never go on dates. These are people I met and I
talked to and I liked talking to, so I talked to again. Thats all." .
"I'm not famous. Would you be happy in a place like Calkins', living with me?"
UNo."
"Why not? Just because I'm not famous?"
"Because you wouldn't be happy. You wouldn't know what to do
In Time of Plague 303
there. You wouldn't fit." Then he felt all her muscles, thigh to shoulder, tighten on him. "That isn't true! I'm being awfuL" She sucked her
teeth. "Do you know, I was terrified to go up to Roger's with you. It
had nothing to do with what I was wearing: I thought you'd behave
dreadfully-you'd either Ooooh and Ahhh the whole afternoon to
death, or you'd shut up and be a big silent hole in the day."
"You think I've never been in any nice places before?"
"But you weren't like that," she said. "Thats the point! You were perfectly fine, you had a good time, and I'm sure Mr Newboyenjoyed it.
If anyone spoiled it, it was me with my silly dress. And I'm a mean,
small, petty person for worrying about such things in the first place."
She Sighed. "Do I get points at all for keeping it to myself this long?"
She sighed again. "No, I guess not."
He blinked at ,the wild sky and tried to comprehend: he could follow her logic, though the emotions behind it confused.
After a while she said: "1 grew up in some awfully big houses. Some
were almost as big as Roger's. When I was at boarding school, once, my
uncle said I could have some kids out to his summer place for my birthday. It came on a long weekend and they said 1 could have ten kids up
from Thursday night till Sunday afternoon. There was one boy at the
Irving School-the boys' school nel<t to ours-named Mal<, whom I
thought wasjust gteat. He came from a poor-well, poorish family. He
was on scholarship. He was intelligent, sensitive, gentle ... and gorwas probably in love with him! I would have been perfectly
happy to take him off for ,the weekend all by himself. But I had to plan
a party: so I planned it all for him. 1 got two girls who just loved to listen to intelligent boys talk-I wasn't a very good listener at the time,
and Max could goon. I invited this perfectly dreadful colored boy who
Mal< said he'd admired because he was second on the debating team
and never did anything wrong. I scoured four schools for the most
marvelous and charming people-people who would entertain him,
complement him, offer just the right contrast. No two people from the
same clique, you know, who would stick together and make a little indigestible dumpling in the stew. The weekend was dreadful. Everyone
had a fabulous time, and for the neXt two years kept asking me when
I was going to do it again. Except Max. The plane ride, ,the horses, the
boats, the maids, the chauffeurs, they were just too much for him. All
he said the whole four days was, 'Thank you,' and, 'Gosh.' About fortyfour limes each. ah, I guess we were. just very young. In another couple of years he would probably have been a socialist or something and
304 Dhalgren
might have attacked the whole thing. That would have been fine! I had
people there who could have argued. At least there would have been
communication. I don't know-maybe I'm still young.» Suddenly she
turned Over. "I could be the older woman in an eighteenth century
French novel right now.' She turned back. "Twenty-three! Isn't that
awful? And they say the twentieth century has a youth hangup.· She
giggled against his chest.
"You want to hear a story from me, now?"
"Um-hm.· He felt her nod.
• About when I was twenty-three. Your age.'
"Sure thing, gramps. That's about three years .£teryou got out of the
mental hospital?'
"No, it's about going to nice places." He frowned. "One summer I
was working up and down the gulf coast, as a header on the shrimp
boats.""
"What\; a header?"
"He washes dishes and pulls the heads off the shrimp. Anyway, I'd
just gotten fired in Freeport and was waiting around to get on anoth-
·erboat-Q
"Why'd you get fired?"
"I got seasick. Now shut up. ARyway, I was sitting in front of this
caft, which was about the only thing {here to do, when these two guys
in black Triumphs came hauling ass around in the dust. One yells, Did
I know where he could get a traveler's check cashed in this God-damn
town. I'd been there three days, so I told him where the bank was. He
told me, Get in, and I showed him and his friend where to go. 'We got
to talking: he was in law school up in Connecticut. 1 told him about
going to Columbia. He got his checi<cashed and asked if 1 wanted to
come along with them-which was better than a room for two bucks
a night I didn't have, so I said, Yeah. A whole bunch of kids were staying out on this island just off the <:oast."
IoI.Uke the commune?'"
·One of ,the kids' fathers was the head of a land development company down The company had moved the fishermen who lived on
,the island someplace else, built a bridge to the mainland, dug a canal,
and built a whole bunch of hundred-and-fifty-thousand, two hundredtbousanddollar homes, lawns in the fronc, Swimming pool on One side,
garage on the other, and boat bouse in the back on the canal so you
could get your boat out to sea. They were ail for the executives of Dow
Chemical, who just about owned the city. So prospective buyers could
In Time of Plague 305
check them out first, the houses were furnished, the freezers were filled
with steaks, the closets stocked with liquor, towels in the bathrooms
and all the beds kept made. The executives could bring their families in
for a weekend to try out the house before they bought it. On Monday,
a truck would come by with maids, carpenters, plumbers, and supplies
to replace anything that had been used up, to clean out the mess, and
fix anything broken. There wasn't anybody on the island, SO the doors
had all been left open. The father had told him since he was in the
area, why didn't he stay there. So the kid, with about twenty of his
friends-they went from about seventeen to twenty-flver-had moved
in. They'd start on one house, drink up all the liquor, eat up the food,
destroy the furniture, break the windows,tear up everything they could,
then move on tD another one. On Monday the maids, carpenters, and
plumbers would fix the damages. 1 stayed with them for two weeks. I'd
pick out a room, lock the door, and read most of the time, while all the
noise went on outside. Every once. in a while, you know. rd come out to
get something to eat-wade through the beer cans in the kitchen, scrape
the grease out of some pan and fry a piece of steak. Then I'd go down to
the swimming pool maybe if it wasn't too bad and, if there wasn't too
much fumiture floating in it, or bettles, or broken glass around, I'd swim
a while. Pretty soon, when it would get too crowded, I'd go back to my
room. Thert:d be people screwing in my bed, or somebody would've gotten sick allover the bureau. Once I found some little girl sitting in the
middle of the floor, out of her head-cocaine allover the rug, and that
is a lot of cocaine: she'd pulled down the drapes and was cutting paperdolls out of them. So I'd take my book and go lock myself in another
room. A couple of days after I got there, the two guys who'd brought me
suddenly decided to fly back to somewhere else. They gave me the keys
to the Triumphs and said I could have them. I don't even know how to
drive. One of them had got !he front smashed in by now, but the other
one was still good. The police came twice. The first time the kids told
them to go fuck themselves andS!rld tbeyweresupposed to b. there, and
the police went away. The second time, llhought it was better I split.
When the shit came down, 1 wouldn't have any rich Texas relatives to
run home to. There was one girl there who said she'd buy me a ticket
into Houston if I would fuck her and stay On more than five minutes."
'No ... ' bnya giggled against his neck.
"She bought me a bus ticket and a pair of jeans and a new shirt."
Her giggling turned to laughter. Then she looked up. "That isn't really true, is it?" Her smile tried to foroe itself through the dawn light.
-
306 Dhalgren
After a second he said, "Naw. It isn't. I mean I screwed her and she
bought the bus ticket for me. But she didn't put it that way. It juSt
makes a better Story.»
·Oh." She put her head down again.
"But you see, I know about nice places. How to act in them. You go
in, and you take what you want. Then you leave. That's what they were
doing down there. That;; what I was doing up at Calkins'.·
Once more she balanced on her chin.
He looked down over his.
She was frowning. "I think you have that absolutely ass backward.
But if it makes you, in your own delightfully naive way. polite and
charming, 1 guess . .. ' She put her head down again, and Sighed. "But
1 wouldn't be surprised if vhere turned Out to be one or two people who
came up to my party in Nova Scotia who were also down in Texas a
few years later at ... yours.·
He glanced at her again and chuckled.
Mist made mountains above the trees, made waves that broke, and
fell and did not reach them.
His chest was damp from her cheek. She turned her head, tickling
him with hair. A leaf, surprising as shale, struck his forehead and made
him look up at the half.bar., branches. "We shouldn't be trying to do
it like this. We're dirty. lts uncomfortable. Soon it's going to get colder, or start raining, or something. Like you said, the commune is sort
of a drag. You sit around and watch them waste whatever they have
and then you finish up the leavings. We'll get a place-'
"Uke the Richards?" she asked, in a tired voice.
"No. No, not like that."
"You think you'd like to put together something like Roger's place?"
"It doesn't have to be aU that spectacular, huh? Just somewhere that
was ours, you know? Maybe something like Tak's got.·
"Mmmm," she said. Then once mo .. she raised her head up on her
chin. should go to bed with Tak again."
"auh? Why?"
"Because hes a nice person. And he'd enjoy it."
He shook his head. "Naw. hesnot my type. Besides, he catches them
when they first get here. I don't think he's interested in anything more
than the first taste, you know?"
"Oh." She put her head down again.
·You trying to get rid of me,' he asked, "like you always taink I'm
trying to do you?"
In Time of Plague 307
"No." After a while she asked, "Does it ever bother you that you
make il with both men and women?"
"When I was fifteen or srxteen it used to bug hell out of me. 1 guess
1 worried about it a lot. By the time I was twenty, though, I noticed that
nO matter how much worrying 1 did, it didn't seem to have too much
tifect on who 1 ended up in bed with. So now 1 don't worry. Its more
fun that way."
"Oh," sae said. "Glib. But logical.'
'Why'd you ask?" He moved her to the sid •.
"I don't knOw." She reached down to touch his hip. Moved her hand
across hls hip. "I fooled arouRd a few times in boarding schooL With
girls, 1 mean. Sometimes, you know. I felt maybe I was a little strange
because I didn't do it more. But I've just never been turned OR to girls,
sexually."
"Your loss,' he said, and pulled her shoulder against his.
She turned to taste his neck, his chin, his lower lip. "What you were
teHing me happened .. ." she said between her tongue's dartings " ...
at the Richards' torught ... must have been ... awful."
"l'mnot going back there." He nipped her. "Ever. I'm not ever going
back."
"Good ... -
Then, from a small movement down her body, he recognized some
new thought had come to her mind. "What?"
"Nothing.1I
"What is it?"
"It isn't anything. I just remembered you told me you were twentyseven years old. "
"Thats right.·
"aut once I remember. just in passing. you mentioned you were
born in nineteen forty-eight."
"Yeah?"
"Well. that's impossible. You'd have to be younger than .•. Hey.
what's tile matter? Yoa're gOiBg all gooseflesh."
As well, behind his rigid loins was a slab of pain. He pushed against
aer. The edge of the blanket, caught under them, rubbed across his
shoulder as he rocked till she tugged them free, aad made a sound,
caught his neck. He held his hips up, probing. She moved her hands
down his back, pushed him down, thrust up her tongue under his. He
made love taking great, gasping breaths. She took many small ones.
Wind wandered back and cooled his running shoulders.
308 Dhalgrm
Mter a laboring release, seething, he relaxed.
How jealous 1 am of those 1 have known afraid to sleep for dreaming.
1 fear those moments before sleep when words tear from the nervous matrix and, like sparks, light what responses they may. That fragmented
vision, seductive with joy and terror, robs rest of itself. Gratefully sunk
in nightmare, where at least the anxious brain freed from knowing its
own decay can flesh those skeletal epiphanies with visual and aural
coherence, if not rationale: better those landscapes where terror is experienced as terror and rage as rage than this, where either is merely
a pain in the gut or a throb above the eye, where a nerve spasm in the
shin crumbles a city of bone, where a twitch in the eyelid detonates
both the sun and the heart.
"What are you staring at?" Lanya asked.
"Huh? Nothing. 1 was just thinking."
Her hand moved on his chest. "About what?"
"About sleep ... and 1 guess poetry. And being crazy."
She made a small sound that meant "go on."
"I don't know. 1 was remembering. Being a kid and things."
"That's good.' She moved her hand, made that small sound again.
"Goon ... "
But with neither fear nor anguish, he felt he had nowhere to go.
He came out of sleep to lights and the stench of burning.
The luminous spider above him blinked off: the redhead lowered
(and as he did, Kidd recognized him) one hand from the chains hanging to his belly. In the other, this time, was a slat from an orange crate.
An iridescent beetle disappeared from a sudden black face (also familiar) above a vinyl vest, shiny as his former carapace.
The arched pincheIS of a scorpion collapsed: "Hey," Nightmare said,
"I think they're about awake."
Kidd's a£ms were around Lanya. She moved her face against his
neck; then moved it again, sharper, deliberate now., conscious.
Two dozen scorpions (most were black) stood in a ring against the
grey morning.
Kidd recognized Denny between one bony, brown shoulder and a
fleshy blackone.
Then the redhead swung his stick.
Lany. shouted-he felt her jerk against his shoulder. She also caught
,the end of the slat.
y
In Time of Plague 309
She gOt to her knees, still holding the stick. Her eyes were wide; her
cheek kept hollowing.
Kidd pushed up to his elbows.
The redhead started to move his end of the stick back and forth.
"Cut that shit, Copperhead." Nightmare hit the stick with his
knuckles.
"I just wanted to make sure they were awake," the redhead said.
"That was all I wanted to do. That's all." He pulled the stick.
Lanya let go.
Nightmare squatted slowly before her, resting his wrists on his torn
knees, with heavy hands, drooping between, balanced by musclebuilder forearms.
Lanya said, "if you're trying to scare hell ,out of us, you've
about succeed.d."
Kidd didn't feel scared.
unya, sitting back on her heels, held her left arm with her right
hand, moving her thumb over the knob of her elbow.
Kidd pushed the blanket from his legs and sat up cross-legged.
Naked in the chained circle, he figured, was better than half covered.
"I gut better things to do than scare you, Lady. I just wanna talk.'
She took a breath, waiting.
"How's he doin'?" Nightmare bobbed his head toward Kidd.
"You doin' pretty well with him?·
"Say what you want to say," she said, and touched Kidd's knee. She
was scared; her fingers were icy.
Nightmare'S forehead, large pores and heavy creases, creased more.
"The other one. You got rid of the other one, huh? That's good." He
nodded.
"Phil ... ?D
"r didn't have much use for •.. Phil? That was his name, huh?"
Nightmare's smile moved his lips more to the side than it curved them.
"Guess you didn't either. So you don't have to worry now. What about
it? I asked you before." Suddenly he d.ucked his head and, from his
thick neclx--the half-braided hair falling from it-lifted a loop of chain.
Lt wasn't the oplicalone.
Reaching forwatd, Nightmare placed it around Lanya's neck. His
fists hung from it like clock weights. The half-inch links creased her
breasts at the nipples. One fist weljt up, one down.
"Hey, man ... ' Kidd said.
310 Dhalgren
Copperhead flipped the stick against !tis hand, watching Kidd.
Kidd looked up: the leopard.freclded, bearded and redheaded spade
was taller and narrower than Nightmare and, for all Nightmare's barbell muscles, looked stronger.
Nightmare's fists Stopped, one on Lanya's belly, one on her breast:
he watched her.
She watched back, her jaw flexing. She took her hand from Kidd's
knee, put both fists around the chain, up near her neck, and ran them
down, so that her left one pushed Nightmare's high one away. "Take it
alI," she. said. "I told you once, 1 don't want it."
A thin, dark woman in the circle, pare breast pushing aside. her vest
flap and chains, shifted her weight. Someone else coughed.
"What about him?" Nightmare said and didn't look at Kidd. "What
you gonna do when we take him? This one's comin' with us, Lady."
"What do you guys ... ?" Kidd stopped. Anger, fascination, and a
third feeling he couldItt name braided together from his brain's base
into his belly and below:
"Take it off,· Lanya said. "I don't want it."
"Why?"
"1 just want to stick to my guns. I don't that <Jften." Then she gave
a funny laugh. "Beside, your costume designer's cruddy."
Nightmare snorted. A few people in the circle laughed too. "What
about yours?" somebody else said. But Nightmar.e lifted the chain.
Scraps of her hair fell from the links.
Then the scorpioll swiveled, boot toes tearing grass. "Here." The
chain went over Kidd's head. Nightmare's eyes were traced coral.
His vest had apparently come apart at One scarred shoulder and was
laced now with rawhide.
Nightmare began to pull the chain.
Cold links slid down Kidd's right nipple. Nightmare's fist came up
against hisleftl:Jreast, warm and rough. "Okay?" Nightmare sqUinted.
There was something wrong with his eyes' focus, Kidd realized, irrel·
evantly.
"What am I supposed t<J do with it?" Kidd said. UWhat is all this
supposed to mean?"
"Don't mean nothin'." Nightmare let go. "You can take it and throw
ilin Holland Lake if you want." Then he rocked back and stood. "I'd
keep it if I were you.·
The circle broke.
Nightmare at their head, big shoulders tacking, big arrns swinging,
In Time of Plague 311
the scorpions filed away. A few glanced back. Ten feet olI, a girl who
could have been white or black and a tall black boy began to laugh
loudly. Then, as though inHated too fast to folloW; an iguana ballooned
luminously, translucent in the grey-light. Then a peacock. Then a spider. The scorpions wandered into the trees.
"What the fuck," Kidd asked, "was that about?» He felt his neck
where there were three chains now: the opUc, the projector, and this
new one-the heaviest.
"Nightmare gets it in his head sometimes that he wants certain
people ... "
The timbre of her voice made him look.
' ... get certain people into !tis nest. " Scrabbling in the blanket, she
came up with her harmonica, put it down and scrabbled some more.
"He wanted you before, huh? What's with Phil?"
"I told you, he was my boyfriend for a while before I met you."
"What was he like?"
"He was a black guy. sort of bright; sort of nice, sort of square. He
was here checkiog out scenes, aoout like you are , .. " Her voice muffled for the last words. He looked agaia: her head was coming out the
top of her shirt while she tugged the ooltom down over her shaking
breasts. "He couloo't really make Calkins' thing that well. He couldn't
make Nightmare'S either.'
The edge of the blanket was tented with the orchid beneath. Reaching for it, Kidd noticed nearly an acre of charced gross across the meadow. Smoke wisped along the edges. That badn' t been there. He frowned.
It hadn't.
"People liked him down at the comm1!lne, I guess. But he was one
of those people you get tired of pretty quick.' He heard the fly of her
jeans rasp. "NightmareS funny. Its sweet of him to ask, I suppose, but
Fm just not the joining kiad. With anyone.'
Kidd slid !tis hand iDto the orclrld's harness, clicked it closed. The
burning smell was very strong. He spread his chewed and enlarged
knuckles, flexed bis scarred and blunted fiagers-
-tickling his shoulder.
He sprang up, whirliog, and crouched.
The leaf rolled down his shoulder fluttered against his knee, spun
on to the ground. Gaspiag, and with !budding heart he looked up the
leaning trurik, over the great bole at the stump of some thick, major
branch, at bare branches and branches hung with ragged tan, at crossed
twigs like shatter lines on the sky.
312 Dhalgren
Moisture sprung on his body and he grew cold.
"Lanya .. . ?"
He looked around at the clearing, and then back at the blanket. She
hadn't had time to put her sneakers on!
But her sneakers were gone.
He circled the tree, frowning, looking out at the cbarred grass and
the other rrees, looking back at this one.
With orchid and chains, he was suddenly far more aware of his
nakedness than when he had awakened! with Lanya at the center of the
scorpion ring.
She's gone back down to the commune, he thought. But why off just
like that? He tried to, recall the funny quality that had been in her voice.
Anger? But that's silly. He touched the chain Nightmare had placed
around his neck. That's silly.
But he stood there a long time.
Then-and his whole body moved with a different rhythm nowhe stepped toward the tree, stepped again; stepped a third time, and
the side of his foot pressed a root. He leaned forward, his knee against
the bark, his thigh, his belly, his chest, his cheek. He closed his eyes
and stretched his chained arm high as he could and pressed his fingers
on the trunk. He breathed deep for the woody smell and pushed his
body into the leaning curve. Bark was rough against the juncture. at
penis and scrotum, rough on the bone of his ankle, the back of his jaw.
Water was running out the corners of both his eyes. He opened
them slightly, but closed them quickly against distortions.
With his weaponed hand-the urge came and went, like a flash
bulb's pulsing a{ter-image, to jam the orchid phloem deep-gently he
moved his blades across the bark. Turning bis hand this way and that;
listening to the variated raspings, again and again he stroked the tree.
When he pushed away, the bark clung to his chest hair, his crotch
hair. His ankle stung. So did his jaw: He rubbed his palm across his face
to feel the mottled imprint; could see it along the flesh ofhis inner arm,
stopping at the loops of chain to continue on the other side.
He went back to the blanket and pulled! his vest from the folds. His
feelings sat oddly between embarrassment and the greatest relief. Unused to either, the juxtaposition cOm used him. Still wondering where
she'd gone. he pulled up his pants, then sat to strap on (wondering why
he still bothered) his one sandal.
He began to search the blanket. He looked under the folds, illted it
to see beneath, frowned and finally searched the whole area.
In Time of Plague 313
After fifteen frustrating minutes, he gave up and started down the
slope. It was only when he reachedlhe door of the park rest rooms (it
had been locked before but someone had broken it open so that the
hasp still dangled by one screw) he remembered he had already given
the notebook, last night,to Newboy.
3
The pipes yowled, started to knock.
A trickle spilled the porcelain, crawled like a glass worm through
light lozenges from the window high in the concrete. He put his
orchid in the next sink and scrubbed hard at his hands, wrists, and
forearms, then bent to drink. He washed some more till his bladder
warmed.
He urinated into the drain in the middle of the floor. Under his
stream the loose grate chattered.
At the sink he wet his fists and ground them in his armpits. Again
and again he wiped his neck. He filled his cupped hands, sloshed his
face, and cupped them to fill again. Bark crumbs flecked him, neck to
knee. He brushed them, rubbed them, washed them away. (Pants and
vest were across another sink.) He put his foot in the bowl. Water ran
between the ligaments. He rubbed; the porcelain streaked black and
grey. Laboriously, fingers tingling, he washed away all the dirt except
what callous had taken permanently. He wet and rubbed his legs to the
thigh, then began the other foot. With dripping hands he kneaded his
genitals; they shriveled at cold water.
Once the trickle gave out.
A minute later, the pipes recommenced yowling. The stream, slightly stronger, started once more.
Water gathered in the hair behind his testicies, dribbled his legs. He
ran his hands over his head. His hair was greasy. With his hands edge,
he squeegeed as much as possible from arms, legs, and sides. The
muddy puddle where he stood reached the drain: plonk-plonk, plonkplonk, plonk-plonk.
Someone around in the stalls coughed.
The labored ablutions had dissolved all verbal thought. But his brain
was super-saturated with the stuff of thinking. The cough-repeated,
and followed by a clearing throat-set thought forming.
Someone old and ill?
He used! his left pant leg to blot dry groin, belly, and back. He
314 Dhalgren
dressed, put the orchid in his belt, and even went outside to walk his
feet dry. He put on his sandal, came back in-he had made a mess, he
realized-and went around the dividing wall hiding the johns.
Not old, the guy certainly looked sick.
Cowboy boots, turned in, rested on their sides. Onesole, pulled free,
showed toes crusty as Kidd's own before washing. Sitting on the toilet
ring, head against the empty paper dispenser, face strung with ropy
hair, bare ribs and wrinkled belly hung with chain-among them a
spherical shield projector. "You okay?" Kidd asked. "You look like
you're ......... :!)
"Unnnn .... " The white scorpion moved his head and, though he
sat both feet on the floor, swayed like a drunken cyclist on a high wire.
"Naw: Naw; I'm not sick ... " The long nose cut shaking hair. Beside ,the nose a rimed eye blinked its purple lid. "Who ... who you?"
"Who're you?" Kidd countered.
·Pepper. I'm Pepper.l ain't sick." He put his head back against the
dispenser. "I just don't feel well."
Kidd felt a small, sharp sadness; as well, an urge to laugh. "What's
the matted"
Pepper suddenly shook the hair from his eyes and was almost still.
"Who you run with?"
Kidd frowned.
"Ain't you a scorpion?" Pepper gestured with a hand whose nails
were graphite spikes. "Guess you run with Dragon Lady."
"I don't run," Kiddsaid. "With anybody."
Pepper squinted. "I used to be with Nightmare's nest." The squint
became curious. "You with Dragon Lady now? What did you say your
name was?"
On a ludicrous impulse, Kidd stuck his thumb in his pocket, put his
weight on one hip. ·Some people been calling me the Kid."
Pepper's head went back the other way. Then he laughed. "Hey; I
heard of you." His gums were rimmed with rot and silver. 'Yeah,
Nightmare, he said something about the Kid. He was talkin' to Dragon Lady when she was over. I heard 'ern talking. Yeah." His laugh
broke; he laid his head back against the wall and moaned. "I don't
feel teat well."
"What'd you hear?" Within surprise, Kid (Kidd decided) reflected
on smallness of the city.
Pepper raised only his eyes; "Nightmare," and lowered them. "He
told her you was around, that he thought you was ... ' He coughed:
In Time of Plague 315
sound, weak, still tore things inside. His hands, upturned, shook
on his thighs, shook when he coughed: " ... till she went away."
Which made fairly little sense; so he asked: "You been in here all
night?"
Cough. "Well, 1 ain't gonna stay out there in the dark!" Pepper's
hand gathered enough strength to indicate the doorway.
"You can find yourself a clump of brush, get inside whete nobody
can see. It's pretty warm out, and it's more comfortable than sleeping
on the can. Get yourself a blanket for the night-"
"Man, there're things out there." At first Pepper's face seemed seized
with pain. But he was just squinting. "Thafs what you do, huh? ,Yeah,
you must be pretty brave. Like Nightmare told her."
Which made equally little sense. "How corne you're not with Nightmare? I saw him this morning, with his gang. Dragon Lady wasn' t with
him." .
"Naw;" Pepper said. "Naw; she ain't gonna be with him now. They
had a fight, see. Oh, Jesus, was that one bloody garden party!" This
time Pepper's "pain" was memory.
"What was it about?" Kid asked.
Pepper's head came forward, his hair strings swinging. "You see
those scars on Nightmare's shoulder? You seen them scars?" He tried
to nod. "Oh, 1 guess ifs blown over now; and they almost friendly. But
she got her own nest again, somewhere over in Jackson 1 heard. And
they ain't gonna be together too much any more, I don't think." His
head fell back, and he repeated: "I ain't feeltng too well."
"What's the matter with you?"
"I dunno. Maybe 1 ate something bad. Or I got a cold maybe."
"Well, does it hurt in your stomach, or is your head stopped up?"
"I told you, I don't know why."
"What hurts?"
Pepper shook back hair and sat up again. "How can I tell you what
hurts till 1 know wrong?" .
"How can anybody know what's wrong till you say what-"
Pepper lurched upright.
Kid started to catch him.
But Pepper didn't fall. Scrubbing at his face with Iris fist and snuffling, he said, "I been staying with Bunny, but 1 think she threw me out.
Maybe we better go back there and find out, huh?" He let go of the side
of the stall. "I think I'm feeling a little better. You know Bunny?"
"I don't think so.·
316 Dhalgren
"She dances over in that freak joint,
"You mean the little silver-haired guy?"
"She's pretty together. A But togelher." Pepper lurched forward.
"I wish 1 had a God-damn drink of water."
.. Come on around t.o [ae sink. n
Pepper passed unsteadily, staggered around the
Kid followed.
Pepper spun one of the taps and jerked his hand back when the
pipes began their complaint. " ... nothing'S coming out," he ventured.
"Give it a second.:II
When the. trickle had gone on half a minute, Pepper grimaced. "Shit,
that ain't big enough to drink." He turned again and staggered for
door. "God damn I wish I had some water."
Kid, in amused frustration,. turned orr the tap and went out. Pepper
was wandering up the slope.
Kid watched for a few steps, then turned down toward the commune.
"Hey!"
He.looked back. "What?"
"Ain't you coming with me?"
His amusement diminished to minuscule. "No." Minuscule, it still
made him wait Pepper's reaction.
"Hey, then." Pepper returned, his stagger now loosened to a bowlegged jounce. "Maybe 1 better come on with you, huh?"
Kid started walking: Not the reaction wanted.
Pepper caught up. "Look, we go where YOIl going, then we go where
I'm going, huh? That's fair."
"There's a water fountain."
"Naw, man! You're in a rush. I don' t wanna hold you up none. n
Kid sighed, came to a decision, and bellowed: "GET THE. FU CK
OUT OF HERE!"
Pepper stopped, blinking.
Kid took a breath and walked on, shaking his head. I don't like to
yell at people, he thought. And then, smiling: That isn't uue-l just
don't get muca chance.
He: came to trees at the edge ()f the clearing.
The cinder blocks on the near side of the fireplace had been pushed
over. Smoke dribbled into the air. Ashes greyed the grass.
There were no people.
Ten feet from the picnic table lay the torn sleeping bag that nobody
In Time of Plague 317
used because somebody had been sick in it one night and fouled it with
puke and diarrhea.
Puzzled, he walked to the furnace, between tin cans and package
wrappers. (On the picnic bench, someone had overturned a carton of
garbage.) With his sandal, he scraped away cinders. Half a dozen coals
turned up red spots, which pulsed, wavered and went out.
"tanya?'1
He turned, waiting, for her answer, uncomfortable at any noise in
thiS ringed, misty clearing. Even at the height of the project period,
there were usually half a dozen people at the fire. A torn blanket lay
under the bench-but it had been there all week. The sleeping bags
and blanket rolls usually piled haphazard by trees and behind the firewood were gone.
"lanya!H
A decision to move? But she would have known about that and told
him. Save for the overturned cinder blocks of the furnace wall, there
were no marks of violence; only junk and disorder. He had come here
with her to eat ... how many times? He had been quiet and observed
his own measured politeness. Momentarily he fantasized that his re-
$<:rYe and preoccupation had been SO unbearable them that they had
all, wi th Lanya cooperating, schemed to abandon him, suddenly and
silently. He would have pondered it more than a· moment had the idea
Dot urged him to giggle; frowning stiD seemed more appropriate.
"lanya?"
He turned to squint among the trees.
When the figure biding in the brush realized it had been seen, itit was Pepper-stepped hesitantly forward. "You're looking for somebody down here, hey?" Pepper craned to look left, then right. "I guess
they all gone away, you know?"
Kid sucked his teeth and scanned the clearing again, wltile Pepper
judged distances.
"r wonder why they all went away, huh?" Pepper stepped nearer.
Kid's annoyance with Pepper's presence was absorbed in his discomfort at Lanya's absence. He hadn't been that long washing. Wouldn't she
bave waited-?
"Where you think they all went?" Pepper advanced another step.
"Well if you don't !mow, you:'re no use. D
Pepper's laugh was hoarse, light, and infirm as his cough. "Why
dbn' t you come on with me to Bunny's? She lives right behind the bar.
r mean, if you can't find your friend down here. Get something to eat.
318 Dhalgren
She don't mind none if I bring friends over. She says she likes them
long as they're nice, you know? You ever seen Bunny dance?JI
"A couple of times.» Kid thought: She might have gone over to that
bar.
"I never have. But she's supposed to be good, huh? All sorts of weird
people hang out in that place. I'm scared to go in."
"Come on. 11 Kid looked once more: And she was not there. "Let's
.go.n.
"You coming? Good!» Pepper followed him for a dozen steps. Then
he said, "Hey. n
UWhat?:n
"Its shorter if we go this way."
Kid stopped. "You say Bunny lives right behind
"Uh-huh." Pepper nodded. "This way, through here."
"Okay. If you say so.»
"It's a lot shorter," Pepper said. "A wholelot. It really is." He started, still stilI-legged, into the trees.
Kid followed, doubtful.
He was surprised how soon they reached the park wall; it was just
over a hill of trees. The path down to the lion gate must have been more
curvy than he'd ,thought.
Pepper scrambled up the wall, wheezing and grimacing. "You
know," he panted from the far side as Kid crouched to vault, "Bunny is
a guy, you know? But she likes to be called 'she.'"
Kid sprang, one hand on the stone. "Yeah, yeah, I know all about it."
Pepper stepped back as Kid landed On the pavement. 'You know,"
he said,as Kid bounced upright, "youre like Nightmare."
"How?lI
"He yells a lot. But he don't mean it."
"I'm not gonna yell at you again," Kid said. "I may break your head.
But I'm not gonna yell"
Pepper grinned. 'Come on this way."
They crossed the empty street.
"You meet a new person, you go with him," Kid mused, "and suddenly you get a whole new cily." He'd offered it as a small and oblique
compliment.
Pepper only glanced at him, curiously.
"You go down new streets, you see houses you never saw before,
pass places you didn't know were there. Everything changes.»
"This way." Pepper ducked between bUildings not two reet apart.
In Time of Plague 319
They sidled between the flaking boards. The ground was a-glitter
from the broken windows.
Pepper said, "Sometimes it changes even if you go the same way."
Kid recalled conversations with Tak, but decided not to question
Pepper further, who didn't seem too good with abstractions. In the
alley, Kid stopped to brush the glass off his bare foot.
"You okay?" Pepper asked.
"Callous like a rock.»
They walked between the gaping garages. A blue car-'75 Olds?-
had been driven through a black wall: snapped boards and sagging
beams, scattered glass, skid marks across the roadway. The car was
impaled in broken wood to its dangling door. Who, Kid wondered,
bad been injured in the wreck, who had been injured in the house?
Hanging over the sill of another smashed wind"w was a btue telephone receiver-hurled out in fear or fury? ACCidentally dropped or
jarred?
·Uhn.» Pepper gestured with his chin toward an open door.
As they walked the dark corridor, Kid smelled traces of something
organic and decayed, which was about to remind him of-when he remembered what, they had already come Out on the porch.
Somebody in workman's greens and orange construction boots, on
a high ladder against the corner lamp post-it was a woman he had
noticed his first night in the bar-was unscrewing the street sign.
. Metal ground metal; HAZE ST came out of its holder. From the ladder top she picked up AVE Q, inserted it, and began to screw bolts.
"Hey?" Kid was both amused and curious. "Which one of those is
right?"
She frowned back over her shoulder. "Neither one, honey, far as I
knOw."
But Pepper was crossing toward the unmarked, familiar door. Kid
followed, looking around the street, estranged by smoky daylight. "I
don't think I've ever been here this time of day befo,e."
Pepper just grunted.
The door they entered waS two from the bar entrance.
At the top of the steps, Pepper blocked the cracks of light and
thumped with the back of his hand.
"All right, all right. Just a second, dea'r. It isn't the end of the
world-" the door swung in-"yet. • Around Bunny's thin neck a white
silk scarf was held by a silver napkin ring. "And if it is, I certainly don't
want to hear about it at this hour of the morning. Oh, it's you."
320 Dhalgren
"Hi!" Pepper's voice mustered brigbtness and enthusiasm. "This is
a friend of mine, the Kid. "
Bunny stepped back.
As Kid walked in, Bunny pointed a knuckly, manicured finger at
Pepper. "It's his teeth, actually."
Pepper gave his stained and pitted grin.
"Peking Man-do you know about Peking Man? Peking Man died
of an ulcerated tooth." Bunny brushed back bleached, silken hair.
"Show me a boy with bad teeth and 1 just feel so sorry for him, that 1-
well, I'm not responsible. Pepper, darling, where: have you been?"
"Jesus,I'm thirsty," Pepper said. 'You got something to drink? You
couldn't get a God-damn drink of water in the God-damn park."
"On the sideboard, dear. It hasn't moved."
Pepper poured wine from a jug with an ornate label fiISt into a handleless cup, then a jelly jar.
"Have you any idea where he was? I know not going to teli me."
Bunny dodged while P"pper handed Kid the jar.
"YOR get the glass 'couse you're company."
"YOll could have poured one for me too, dear. But you're famous for
not thinking of things like that."
"Jesus Christ, sweelheart, 1 thought YOR had one already working.
1 really did." But Pepper made no move to paRr another.
Bunny raisodexasperated eyebrows and went to get a cup.
Pepper gestured with his. "You don't tell her where I was. That's for
me to know and her to find out." He finished his wine and went for
seconds. "Go on, have a seat. Sit down. Bunny, did you throw me out
of here last night?"
"The way you were carrying ,on, doll, I should have." Bunny
ducked under Pepperl; elbow and, cup on fingertips, returned. "But
1 didn't get a chance. Have you ever noticed that about people who
are dumb in a particular way? In-stn-si-tive-" Bunny's eyes closed
on the antepenultimate- "to everything. Except one second before
catastrophe: Then they split. Oh, they know when thall coming all
right. I guess they have {a. Otherwise they'd be dead. Or missing an
arm, or a head, or something." Bunny's eyes narrowed at Pepper (who,
on his third cup already, turned to the room, a little more relaxed).
"Darling, 1 could have killed you last night. 1 cORld have committed
murder. Did 1 throw you out? Ifl did, YOR wouldn't be here noW. But
I'm -calmer today. n
Kid decided not to ask what Pepper had done.
In Time of Plague 321
"Go on," Pepper said. "Sit down. On the couch. That!; where [sleep,
so ill; okay. She sleeps in there."
"My boudoir." Bunny gestured toward another room, where Kid
could see a mirror and a dressing table with bottles and jaIS. "Peppers
very eager to clear that up with all his new friends. Yes, do have a seat"
Kidsat.
'Oh, there've been afew times-but you were probably too high to
remember those-when you've turned into quite a tiger. Pepper, darling, you shouldn't be so concerned about what other people think."
"If' cared what he thought, 1 wouldn't 'a brung him in here," Pepper said. "You want some more wine, Kid, just take it. Bunny don't
mind.1I
"Act>lally-" Bunny stepped back into the boudoir door-"Pepper
is a part of that tragic phenomenon, 'Ihe Great American Un-screwed.
Alot ohalk about how much he wants to, but if you want my opinion,
1 don't think Pepper has gone to bed with anything in all his twentynine years that didn't JRSt roll him over in his sleep. That he rather
likes. But God forbid he wake up!"
"' don't talk about doin' anybody lain' t never done," Pepper said,
"which is more'n I can say for you. Why don't you lay aID"
from the couch, Kid said: "I just came around to see if somebody
was in Teddy's. 1 want to-"
"Well, take a look, if you like.' Bunny unblocked the door. "But I
doubt it. In here. Where you can see."
Wondering, Kid got up and walked past Bunny into the second
room. Though nothing was out of place, it gave the impression-with
Ihree chairs, a bed, a dozen pictures on the wall, from magazines (but
all (ramed)-of clutter. Oranges, reds, purples, and blues massed in
the bedspread. Yellow plastic floweIS hung over the back of a pink ceramic dove. Interrupting the floral wallpaper was a black curtain.
"In there."
Kid stepped around a grubby; white vinyl hassock (everything had
spockles of silver glitter on it) and pushed back black velvet.
Through cage baIS, he saw upturned stools clustering the counrer.
Under a skylight he had never noticed before-this was the first time
he had seen the place during the day-the empty booths and tables
looked far more rickety: the whole room seemed larger and shabbier.
"Is the bartender there?" Bunny asked.
"No.'"
"Then they aren't ,even open."
322 Dhalgren
Kid dropped the curtain.
"Isn't that convenient? I just run right out there and do my thing,
then run right back in here, and am shut of you all. Come on back
inside. Don't run away.· Bunny motioned Kid into the living room.
"I really think scorpions are fascinating. You're the only really effective enforcement organization in the city. Pepper, what was the
name of your friend with all the ugly muscles and that lovely, broken ... ? Bunny nudged his upper lip with his forefinger. ' ... This
one here?"
"Nightmare."
"Fascinating boy." Bunny glanced at Kid. "He:s old as I am, dear, but
I still consider him very young. (Really, you must sit down. I'm the only
one who's allowed to wander around and make everyone nervous.) You
scorpions do more to keep law and order in the city than anyone else.
Only the good and the pure in heart dare go out on the street after dark.
But that's d,e way, 1 suppose, the law has always worked. The good people are the ones who live their lives so that they don't have anything to
do with whatever law there is anyway. The bad ones are the ones unfortunate enough 10 become involved. I rather like the way it works
here, because, since you are the law, the law is far more violent, makes
much more noise, and isn't everywhere at ORCe: so its ,easier fDrus good
people to avoid. Are you sure you wouldn't like some more wine-?"
"l told him to get it when he wants it."
"I'll get it for him, Pepper. You may not be a gentleman, but I am a
lady." Bunny plucked the jar from Kid's hands and Went to fill it and another cup. "Just an old-fashioned girl, too, shy to dive into the rushing
river of worldly fame, too late for the mouse-drawn pumpkin to take
me to the ball, too old for Gay Lib-not to mention Radical Effeminisml" Bunny COUldn't have been more than thirty-five, Kid thought.
"Not in body, mind you. Just in spirit. Ah, well ... I have the consolations of philosophy-or whatever the hell you call it. "
Kid sat down on the couch beside Pepper.
Bunny returned with the brimming jelly glass. "When you let your
little light shine, what gteat and luminous beast do you become?ff
not a scorpion.»
"You mean you just like to dress up that way? And wear a shield
around your neck? Mmmm?"
'Somebody gave me these clothes when I got my others messed up."
Kid took the jar and picked up his projector at the end of its chain.
"This doesn't have a battery or something. I just found it.·
In Time of Plague 323
"Ah, then you're not reaHy a scorpion yet. Like Pepper, right? Pepper used to be a scorpion. But his battery's run down.·
"r guess that's what it is." Pepper rattled the links of his shield
among his other cllains. "I gotta get hold of another one and see."
"Pepper used to be the most charming bird of paradise. Red, yellow,
and green plumes-one could almost ignore its relation to the COmmon parrot. Then he began to flicker, more and more, sputter, grow
dim. Finally-" Bunny's eyes closed- "he went totally out." They
opened. "He hasn1 t been the same since. 11
"Where could you pick up one? A battery, I mean."
"Radio store," Pepper said. "Only the guys have about stripped all
the places around here. A department store, maybe. Or maybe somebody's got an extra One. Nightmare'S got a lot, I bet."
"How exciting, to anticipate your glowing aspect, to puzzle Over
what you'll turn out to be.·
"Inside here-" Pepper snapped his shield apart- "they got a little
thing in here that's supposed to be what it is. But it just looks like a
whole lot of.colored dots to me. The battery goes in there.' He picked
at the mechanism with a grey nail-"This one ... " -and pried loose
a led and white striped oblong with blue lettering: 261/2 Volts D. C,
below a colophon of gathered lightning. "This one ain't worth shit."
He flipped it across the room.
"Not on the floor, Pepper love.' Bunny picked up ,the battery and
put it on a shelf behind some porcelain frogs, vases of colored glass,
and.several alarm clocks. 'Tell me, Kid, now that you've found me, just
who were you looking for?"
"A girl. unya. You know her: You spoke to her one night in the bar
when George Harrison was there. "
"Oh, yes: She-who-must-be.obeyed. And you were with her. Now I
do remember you. That was the night they made George the new
moon, wasn't it? The way that poor man has driven all those silly
dinge-queens out of their flippy little minds is just terrible!"
Kid turned his jar. "He has a pretty heavy fan club."
"More power to him, I say." Bunny raised the cup overhead. "But if
George is the New Moon, darling, r am the Evening Star.·
Pepper loosed his consumptive giggle.
"I want to go out and look for her," Kid said. "If she comes into
Teddy's after it opens, will you give her a message for-"
"I can' tthink of any reason why I should. She has a much easier time
getting hers than I do getting mine. What do you want me to tell her?"
324 Dhalgren
"Huh? Just that I was around looking for her, and that I'll be back."
IOSmile."
"What?"
"Grin. Like this." Bunny's bony face became a death mask around
bright, perfect teeth. "Let's see an expression of ecstatic happiness."
Kid twisted his lips back qUickly and decided this was his last politeness.
To Kid's leer, Bunny returned a wistful grin. "You just don! seem to
have any special points of attraction. Actually, I'd put you rather low
down on my list. It's completely personal, you understand. I suppose I
can afford to tell your girlfriend you're looking for her. I will if! see her."
"Everybody's somebody's fetish," Kid said. "Maybe I still got hope?"
"That's what I keep teDing Pepper. But he just won't believe me."
"\ believe it." Pepper said from his end of the couch. "You just won't
believe you ain't mine. D
"Oh, 1 don't think.I'm revealing allY embarrassing secrets when I
say that you can be very sweet and affectionate once you relax, N/),
Pepper is justterribly uncomfortable at the idea that anyone could find
him attractive. It's that simple."
"It ain't happened !'hat often sa I'm what you'd call used to it." Pepper squiRted iRtO Ihe bottom of his "up, rocked up to his feet, and
walked to the counter. He gave Bunny a passing nudge on the arm with
his elbow. "Bunny's a good guy. but she's a nut."
'Owl" Bunny rubbed the spot, but grinned after Pepper.
Kid grinned too and tried not to shake his head.
"Why are you two here now, anyway?" Bunny asked. "What are the
scorpions doing today? Shouldn't you be out working?"
"You trying to kick me out again?" Pepper stooped to open a cabinet and took ouE another jug which he put on the counter beside the
one now empty.
Kid saw four more gallons and decided to leave after this glass.
"Where was NightmareS gang off to this morning?"
"You said you saw them. How many were there?"
"Twenty, twenty-five maybe," Kid said.
"Maybe he's gonna pull that Emboriky rip-alI today. How you like
that?ZI
"Oh, no!" Bunay put the cup down_"Oh well."-Then picked it
up again, to sip pensively.
"He's been talking about it for a month, but he wants a whole damn
arm)'"
In TIme of Plague 325
"Why's he need so many people?" Kid asked. Emboriky?"
"Big downtown department store."
"Lovely things," Bunny said sadly. "Perfectly lovely things. I mean
it isn't just your run of the mill five-and·dime. I just wish I could have
some of their stuII in here. Give some class to this place. Oh, I hate to
think of you guys clamping around in all that beautiful stuff."
"Nobody's gotten to it before?"
"Guess not." Pepper said.
"Maybe just a little," Bunny explained. "But you see, now it's 'occupied.' Some kid got killed back a little while ago trying to break in."
"Killed?"
"Somebody leaned out the thkd-story window;" Pepper said, "and
shot ,the motherfucker dead." He laughed. "A couple of other people
got shot at, who were just passing by. But they didn't get hurt."
"Perhaps it's Mr Embonky. protecting his worldly goods." Bunny
contemplated the cup bottom, looked over at the fresh gallon, but
thought better. "I wouldn't blame him. "
"Naw, naw;- Pepper said. "It's a whole bunch in there. Nightmare'S
one of the people who got shot at. He said shots came from lots of
places."
Bunny laughed. "Imagine! Two dozen sales clerks valiantly holding
off the barbarian hordes! I hope those poor children don't get hurt"
"You think it's the sales clerks?" Pepper asked.
"No." Bunny sighed. "Irs just whoever got to the Gun Department
in Sporting Goods fIrst."
"Nightmare's got this real thing about it. He really wants to get in
!'here and see what's going on. I guess I would too if somebody'd shot
at me out the third-story window."
"You?" Bunny exploded at the ceiling. "You'd be back here with your
head under the pillow so fast! Why aren't you out there with them
now? No, no, that's all right. I'd rather have you here safe and sound.
If yon gOI your ass full of buckshot, I just know it would be for something stupid.'
"I think getting your ass full of buckshot is pretty stupid for any
reason."
"Fine!" Bunny pointed an admonishing finger. "You just stick to
that idea and keep momma happy. One honorable man!" Bunnys hand
returned to the cup. "Yea, even for Ihe want of One honorable man. Or
woman-I'm not prejudiced. That's really what Bellona needs.' Bunny
regarded Kid. "You look like a sensitive sort. HaYen't you ever thought
326 Dhalgren
that? Lord knows, we have everything else. Wouldn't it be nice to
know that somewhere around here was one good and upright individual-one would do, for contrast."
"Well, we've got Calkins,' Kid said. "HeS a pillar of the community."
Bunny grimaced. "Darling, he owns that den of iniquity in there
where I display my pale and supple bod every evening. Teddy just runs
it. No, Mr C wonlt pass, I'm afraid."
"You got that church person," Pepper offered.
Amy?" Bunny grimaced again. dear, shes sweet, in
her own strange way. But that's absolutely not what 1 mean. Thars the
wrong feeling entirely."
"Not that church," Pepper countered. "The other one, over on the
other side of the city."
"You mean the monastery?" Bunny was pensive as Pepper nodded.
"1 really don't know that much about it. Which speaks well for it, I'm
sure."
"Yeah, someone mentioned that to me n Kid said, and remembered it was Lanya.
"It would be nice to think that, somewhere inside its walls, a truly
good person walked and pondered. Can you imagine it? Within the city
limits? Perhaps the abbot or the mother superior or whatever they call
it? Meanwhile the scorpions play down at the Embariky."
"Maybe if you went to the monastery; somebody'd shoot at you too."
"How sad." Bunny looked at the jug again. "How probable. That
wouldn't make me happy at all."
'Where is this place?" Kid asked; with the memory occurred the
fantasy that Lanya, with her curiosity about it, might have gone there.
"I don't actually know," Bunny said. "Like everything else in town,
you JUSt hear about it until it bumps into you. You have to put yourself
at the mercy of the geography, and hope that down-hills and up-hills,
working propitiously with how much you feel like fighting and how
much you feelli!ke accepting, manage to get you there. You'll find ot
eventually. As we are all so tired of hearing, this is a terribly small city."
"r heard its on the other side of town," Pepper said. "Only I don't
even know which side of town this is.·
Kid laughed and stood up. "Well, I'm gonna go." He drained the
wine, and tongued the bitter aftertaste. Wine first thing in the morning, he pondered. Well, he'd don. worse. "Thanks for breakfast."
"You're going to go? But honey, 1 have enough in here for brunch,
lunch, high tea, and dinner!"
In Time of Plague 327
"Come on," Pepper said. "Take another glass. Bunny don't mind the
campany."
"Sorry." Kid moved his jar from Bunnys reach. "Thanks." He smiled.
"I'll come back another time."
"I'll only let you go if you promise me." Bunny suddenly reached
for Kids chest. "No, no, don't jump. Mother's not going to rape you."
Bunny put a froger beneath the chain that crossed Kids belly. ·We have
something in common, you and 1." With the other hand, Bunny lifted
the white silk to show the optical ,chain around a slim, veined neck.
"Nightmare and I, Madame Brown and Nightmare. You and Madame
Brown. I wonder if I betray it by mentioning it." Bunny laughed.
Kid, unsure why, felt his cheeks heat and the rest of his body cool. I
<;an',( have absorbed the custom of reticence so completely in so little
time, he thought. And still wanted anxiously and urgently to leave.
Bunny was saying, "I'll tell your girl friend what you said if 1 see her.
You know even if you did have one of those ... ahem" smiles I find just
too irresistible,l'dstill deliver your message. Because then, you see, I'd
want you to like me, and to come back. Doing something you wanted
me to do would be one way to get that. Just because l'mnot a good person-" Bunny wink.d-·you musm't think I'm a bad one."
"Yeah. Sure. Thanks.' Kid tugged away from Bunny's fmger. "I'll see
you."
"Good-bye!" Pepper called from the taunter where he'd gone for
more wine.
Now the street sign said RUBY and PEARL.
The ladder and the lady in greens were gone.
He pondered and compared directions, dismissed the park, looked
where the mist was thickest (down "Pearl"), and walked. Lanya? remembered his calling, an echo in the dim, an after image on the ear.
Here? In this city? He swled, and thought about holding her. He
sorted his dubious recollections, wondering where he was going. It's
only, he thought, when we're stripped of purpose that we know who
we are.
His missing name was a sudden ache and, suddenly, he wanted it,
wanted it with the same urge that had made him finaliy accept the one
Tak had given. Without it he could search, survive, make word convections in somebody elses notebook, commit fanciful murder, strive
for Someone elses survival. With it, JUSt walking, just being might be
328 Dhalgmt
easier. A name, he thought, is what other people call you. And that's
exacdy where important and where it's not. The Kid? He thought:
I'm going to be thirty in a mouthful of winter and sun. How unimportant then that I can't remember it. How important what my not
being able to remember it means. Maybe I'm somebody famous? No,
I do remember too well what INe done. I wish I felt ·cut alI, alone, an
isolate SOciety of one, like everybody else. Alienation? That isn't what
it's about. I'm too used to being liked.
Damn! He wished he had his notebook; but before the feeling, as he
listened, no word rose to beg.n the complex fiXing. Fingering the
blades at his waist, hearing, not feeling, an edge rasp his callused
thumb, he turned another corner.
Car motors were so unfamiliar that he was frightened, until he actually saw the bus. It hauled itself around the carner and in.to the
whitewashed stop-markings. Clap-clap, 'the doors. He looked at the
balding driver squintIng outth. windshield as if for traffic.
Why not, he thought, and climbed the Worn rubber steps.
'You got a transfer?"
"Hey, I'm sorry: 1f you need fare or something-' He stepped back.
But the driver motioned him on. "This is a transfer point. I thought
you had a transfer, maybe. Corne on.' Clap-clap: the bus rocked forward.
An old man slept in the back seat, hat down, collar up.
A woman in the front sat with her hands crossed on the top of her
pocketbook. A younger woman with a large natural stared out the
window. A boy with a smaller one sat nervously just behind the back
door, toeing one sneaker with the other.
A couple-he with knees wide, sunk in the seat with his arms folded, his face set belligerently, she with legs together, her face registering
something between fear and boredom-were making a point of not
looking at him.
Simultaneously he tealized that there was no seat from which he
could watch everybody and that he was the only non-black on the bus.
He decided to give up the old man and took the next to the last seat.
Where am I-but wouldn't think: going? He looked over the bars
on the seat backs to the blunt nose and lips, the sharp chin, profiled
below the brillowy ball.
He watched the buildings she watched go headlong in goalless motion.
She blinked.
He was only nervQus at the turnings, and had to quell the absurd imIn Time of Plague 329 pulse to go ask the driver where the bus was headed. The headlong, with its implication of easy retorn, was safe. The bus torned again, and he tried to enjoy being lost: but they were going parallel to their first route. They passed a deserted street construction. Only one of the saw- horses had been broken. But from a truck with a flat tire; coils of cable had spilled the pavement. He let his stomach untense, marveling that these disaster remnants still excited. After the smashed plate glass of an army-navy surplus store came movie marquees: no letters at all on the first, a single R on the second; the one line on the next, he had time to reconstruct was "Three Stars says the Times." On the next R, 0, and T were stacked on top of one another; E, Q, and U were followed by a space of three letters and then a Y. Contemplating messages, he fingered for the spiral wire of his note- book, but only bumped his knuckle on blades. On a billboard, some six by sixteen feet, George Harrison, naked, in near silhouette before a giant lunar disk, craned his head to search or howl Or execrate the night. The black, only recognizable by a high- light here and there, stood at the left; the right of the poster was filled night-time forest. Kid turned half around in his seat to watch it, then turned back to the bus in time to see the others turn. He put his fists on the seat be- tween his parted thighs, and leaned, grinning and hanging his neck from slung shoulders. ECKN WS 5 R OGS ND T E G TA Y announced the next marquee. He looked at broken store windows-in one was a pile of naked dummies. The street widened and once smoke rolled by so that he could make out no letters at all upon the final mar- quee of the strip. Where am I going? he thought, thinking they were just words. Then the echoes came: his back chilled, his teeth clicked, then opened be- hind closed lips, staggered and jogged by the engine. He looked for shadows and found none in the. dim bus, on the pale street. So searched
330 Dhalgren
what highlights tn his own body sensation cast in the nervons matrix.
None there: in which to hunt a .ecollection of her face mottled and in·
complete as though lit through leaves. He tried to laugh at his loss. Not
because of this, oh no. Its the wine: Christ, he thought, where did they
all go? The old man behind him moaned in his sleep.
He looked out the window.
Up the sand-colored wall, gold letters (he read it bottom-ta-top first):
E
M
B
o
R
I
K
yo
S
Only one show window was shattered: boards had been nailed
across it. Two others were covered with canvas. A crack in another
zagged edge to edge ..
Kid pulled the frayed ceiling cord, then held on to the bar aCrOSS the
back of the seat before him till the bus, a block later and somewhat to
his surprise, stopped. He jumped off the back treadle to the curb and
turned; through the dirty window, he saw the couple who had not
looked at him when he'd gotten on, stopped looking at him now. The
bus left.
He was standing diagonally across from the five, six, seven, eight
story departtnent store. Uneasily, he backed into a doorway. (People
with guns, hey?) He felt for his orchid-looked at it. It was a very silly
weapon. People shooting out the windows? Several, higher up, were
open. Several more were broken. Across the street a gutter grill waved
a steamy plume. Why, he thought, get out here? Maybe the people in
there have all gone and he could just cross the street and-the skin of
his back and belly shriveled. Why had he gotten off here? It had been
in response to some un-named embryo feeling, and he had leapt out of
the bus, follOwing it to term. But now it was born: and was terror.
Cross the street, motherfucker, he told himsel£ You get up close to
the building and they can't see you out the windows. This way somebody can just aim out and pick you off if they've got a penchant for it.
He told himself some other things too.
In Time of Plague 331
A minute later, he walked to the opposite corner, a sidestep for the
fire hydrant, stopped with his hand against the beige stone, breathing
long. slow breaths and listening to his heart. The building took up all
,the block. There were no show windows down the side alley. Save from
the front door, there was no place from the store he could be seen. He
looked across the avenue. (From what letters still remained on that broken glass, it must have been a travel agency. And down there ... ? Some
kind of office building, perhaps? Burn marks lapped great carbon
tOngues around the lower stories.) The street looked so wide-but that
was because there were no cars at either curb.
He started down the alley, rmming his hand on the stone and occastonally glancing up for the imaginary gunman to lean out a window
and blast straight down.
There's nobody in there, he thought.
There's nobody coming up behind meAt the end of the block something-moved? No, it was a shadow
between two parked truc1ts.
"Hey," somebody said directly across the alley in a voice just under
normaL "What the ruck you think you doin', huh?"
He bruised his arm on the wall, and came away, rubbing it.
A thick shoulder pUShed from bemnd a metal door across the alley.
"Don't get excited." Half of Nightmare's face emerged. Kid could see
half the mouth speaking: "Bnt when I count three, you get your ass
over here so rast I wanna see smoke. One. Two ...• The visible eye rose
to look somewhere up the department store wall, looked back down.
"Three."
Nighttnare caught Kid's arm, and the memory of traversed pavement was battered out by bruises on his back, knee, and jaw-"Hey,
man, you don't have to-" as Nightmare snatched him through the
quarter-opened doorway.
He was in four-fifths darkness with a lot of people breathing.
"God damn," Nightmare said. "I mean Jesus Christ."
He said, "You don't have to break my head," softer than he'd Startedto.
Somebody very black in a Vinyl vest, laughed loudly. For a moment
he thought it was Dragon L1dy, but it was a man.
Nightmare made some disgusted sound. The laugh cut off.
Nightmare's scarred shoulder (it was the first thing Kid saw as his
eyes cleared of the dark) hid half of Denny:' face as the door had hidden half of Nightmare's. The other faces were darker. "You don't think
so?" Nightmare still held Kicrs a";"'. With his other hand, he grabbed
JJ2 Dhalgren
IGd's hair-"Hey' "-and matehed him around 180 degrees: Kid's face
came up against wire, behind some dirty glass, and behind that was-
"Now look up there."
Kid focused outside the dirty window on the second story ofthe department store.
"You lookin' good?"
-was a window where gold letters arched: New Fashions. And be.
hind them, a man, with a rifle in one hand, scratched his thin neck
under the too large collar of his blue sports shirt, then ambled on.
"Now what"-with sweetness-"the hell are you doing here?"
Nightmare yanked Kids head back from the window before he let go.
"Come on.» He sucked his teeth. "Tell me now."
"r just-" Pain subsided.
"r should break your head open, you know?"
"Hey; man, you-"
"Shut up, Copperbead," Nightmare said.
The big, bearded, redheaded spade leaned in the corner. "-you
don't have to do that," he £inished. "I'll do it for you, if you want." He
nodded at IGd in damped recognition. "Give 'im to me."
"Fuck off." Nightmare waved a peremptory fist. "You just come by,
huh? We been planning this three months and you just come by?"
"Well, Pepper told me you guys Were maybe down here-"
Nightmare sucked Some mare. "We been planning-"
"I got him," Denny said. "Let him go with us. He won't hurt noth.
ing. rll tell him what to do." .
Nightmare glanced questioningly over his shoulder.
uSure, Q Denny insisted.
In his corner, Copperhead turned his stick up behind his arm.
"He can go with my group,' Denny repeated. "He won't get in the
way."
Kid thought, unsUre: Three against two.
Once more Nightmare flung round his fist; and growled.
"Come ont " Denny said. "You corne with me.D
"You don't let him mess up anything!" Nightmare admonished with
his chin.
"Yeah. The Kid'lI be okay."
"He'd better be."
"Hes a good guy. Nightmare. Come on, you said he was a good guy
yourself."
Nightmare growled once more.
In Time of Plague JJJ
Kid stepped by him, tried and failed not to look at Copperhead.
Copperhead blinked and started to smile. Kid decided it was worth his
life to fail at anything among them agaiIL
Denny clapped Kid's arm. "Let's go." He looked around and, louder:
·You guys, let's go.·
Some dozen (safer ... ) clustered; and they were walking through
allother door, following Denny. The han of some sOrt of warehouse?
Maybe the back corridor of another store? He looked at the faces
around him. The real black guy in vinyl looked up from Kid's orchid,
blinked, looked away; he wore one too, but in a leather strap.
"Here," Denny said, primarily to Kid. "We just wait here. You fol·
low us when we go. Don't worry."
The.y stopped before another door. A window on one side showed
the Emboriky's sandy wall.
Denny looked over the scorpions with him.
IGd thought: They top Pepper, r guess.
Denny folded his arms, leaned beside the window, occaSionally
looked out.
Like Copperhead's little blond brother.
They have a plan; Kid thought, caught in it.
I am not thinking of Lanya.
One on wet leather, one on grit, his feet tingled. How did I get here?
Did r choose to come? I want to control these people. (The tingling
reached his head, subsided.) r chose. Observe and go, easy with them.
He would ask Denny the details of the plan-began to tingle; so didn't.
Observe? But his ntind twisted in. Well. What did he think? Night·
mare, with all his unreciprocity, he liked. Copperhead was efficient and
detestable, a combination intriguing because, in his experience, it was
unusual. Denny? Astounded, he realized: Denny had given him the
clothes he wore, had first lopped the obtrusive d from his name, and
nOw had him in custody. He sqUinted at two of the black guys leaning
by the window (Denny glanced atIGd, at the Uoor, out the window) in
webbed shadow. NightmareS lieutenant ... He tried to review the faces
left at the halll; end; there were more than three women in the group.
Prompted by the bus ride, he mused on Fensterl; population percentages:
What percentage were black? George? Waiting, chained and flowered
(he'd seen half a dozen knives), I don't want to individualize them.
Rather deal in their mass than texture. (priest, Anthrax, Lady of
Spain-these names had already been whispered around him: De.vas·
tation, Glass (the black in vinyl), California, Filament, Revelation
334 Dhalgren
(blond as Bunny but with brutally red skin), Angel, Dollar, D-t.) Fight
that. Some two dozen strung down this grey in grey, waiting: there are
probably more here who have killed by accident than by intent. That
makes them dangerous. What do they become?
"That thing work?" Denny pointed to Kid's shield.
"No battery."
Denny shook his head, aping Nightmare's disgust. "You stay with
me, then.l'l
Either the people or the situation is boring. But either the situation
or the people are inlriguing. I cannot fix the distinction. Nor, having
chosen, would it be useful. Again, I am somewhere where the waiting
is more instructive than initial or terminal action. Not thinking of
Lmya entails: Her green blinking when something I do surprises her,
her expression (it always seems sad) seconds before laughter when
something I do amuses. Is this like forgetting a name? I want to be
among these people. (Where would she have gone?) It is difficult, because it grosses SQ little, to consider that I don't want to be with her.
But these, who chew their teeth and shuRle, and engage in interesting
waiting: what is their plan? Not so much afraid of what I don't know
about what they do; the cool, absorptive fear I used to feel before stealing books and comics from comer kiosks, shopmting small compasses
and ornamental bullets from army-navy surplus stores.
A long time later, a long way away, someone whistled.
While Denny said, "Come on," everybody moved.
The doors flapped.
They ran across the street; scorpions were running up the alley. "In
here!" was steps down and a metal door in the Emboriky's side. Kid
thought; Grains struggling through the stricture ·of an hour-glass. He
watched Denny three steps before him, paused when Dermy paused (at
the bottom of more stepsl quickened after him. (Worlds within worlds:
I am in a different world.) At the first landiog, Denny motioned the
others ahead, glanced to make sure Kid was still behind him (Plans,
completed .and synchrOnized, sketched floor layouts, schedules for the
changing guard-he hadn't seen anyone who looked that intelligent),
then pulled a heavier chain from his neck and wound two lengths
around his fist. "Ihis way." The others' footsteps faded above them as
they went from the army drab stairwell through a doorway.
Kid pulled his orchid from his belt loop (the loop, worn from the
blade, snapped) and fitted his wrist into the harness. "What's in here?"
"Nothirr," Denny said. "I hope."
•
In Time of Plague 335
The short hall ended on a room full of cardboard boxes. (The
wrappiog paper in Apartment 19-A. Why?) They had fallen from halfstacked shelves, they covered the floor; they had been pushed into
piles and had fallen again.
"What are we doing, huh?" Kid asked.
"Keeping our asses out of trouble," Denny said. "They wanna run
around and get shot at, okay; you got more brains than that. The store's
eight stories high. Covers the whole block. We figure there's maybe ten,
fifteen people in here. I think we're on the mezzanine." He glanced
back again. "I hope."
They stepped out into darkness that became three-quarter dark. Kid
sniffed. Something had burned in here too. His arm brushed hanging
plastic. They snuck through racks of shower curtains, into bath mats
and accessories.
"Sure this is the mezzanine?»
"The railiog should be over there."
"You been in here before?"
"Keep it down," Denny said. "No. But I talked to somebody who has."
"Wbat-" Kid whispered; "What is Nighttnare trying to do in here?"
Denny looked back aga·in. "You think he knows? This is a run!"
They reached towels. By an overturned counter, they walked across
mounds of terry cloth. the cool, charred dark stopped at a glass balcony rail with a brass bar. There was light up from below; leaning out
("Hey, watch it," Denny said, "somebody might be down there."J Kid
could not see its soUrce.
There're people in here, Kid thought. There're people in here,
walking around, with guns. He looked over the balcony. down at
counters and the paths between where grey ribbons of light layover
riotous indistinguishables.
Some ,one, some two, scorpions ran out among them.
Denny took Kids shoulder.
Three more, like mazed mice, zagged through the aisles.
"Hey, what the hell do you people think you're-" shouted by somebody who sounded like he waS in a stairwell.
Five heads, deployed among lingerie and watchbands, swiveled.
Two of the scorpions went on li:ke flash bulbs-a rooster and some sort
of baby dinosaur.
Kid pulled back from the light. Denny was looking up, suddenly
aware that they both noW had shadows swingiog acrosS the ceHing.
"Douse your God-damn lights!" which was Nightmare.
336 DhalgTen
The gun,.clap fil!led the double story. The echo settled.
Some flat rellex that held neither fear nor excitement took him back
from the rail (for a moment he saw Denny's excited, frightened face)
among the dark displays. Then Denny was behind him.
"Hey; they got in! Hey; they GodCdamn got in-"
"Mark?" A woman. "Mark? Mark, what's down there ... "
"You get back! Did they get in? You didn't see-"
Echo botched all meaning in a fourth, fncative voice.
Someone nea·rer tried to interrupt: "What are you-? Why don't
you-? Hey; look ... "
"1 saw their lights! For God's sakes, 1 saw 'their lights! Somebody
called out, too. I saw ... "
Draped plastic dragged Kid's shoulder. And the woman standing behind it shook the rille at them, said, "Hhhhhhhhaaa ... " and started
walking backward.
Mutually; Kid thought, paralyzed with terror.
But Denny wasn't paralyzed. He grabbed his shield projector and
disappeared in light.
Neitherwas the woman. She staggered backward in the sudden glare
and fired somewhere between them. The rifle gave a breathy cTach, and
Kid. recognized her green dress: It was the woman, Lynn, he'd sat next
to, his last visit to the Richards'. Now, squinting, and screaming, she
held up the rille to block the light. On the handle, lit by Denny:': shield,
in four. color decalcomania, Red Rider smiled at Little Beaver, sur·
rounded by a yeHow lariat. The air-pump rattled. A bee-bee in the eye,
he mused: And lunged.
He thought she would throw the gun at him.
But she held it, and when she didn't let go on the second jerk (the
blades of the orchid clicked on the harrel he grasped), he turned it hard
and kicked her. She jerked her twisted hands away, shook them,
turned. He smacked her shoulder with the rille butt, and she dodged
in darkness.
He turned, mainly to see what Denny was:
A ,ten-foot blob of light, colorful and disfocused, ran into itself like
an amoeba erupting.
It went out, and Denny's hand carne down from his neck. Kid
pushed the bee-bee gun at him. "What the hell," he whispered, "are
you supposed to he?" The fear made him laugh.
Waving the gun, they stalked through the mezzanine shadows.
"Huh?U
In Time of Plague 337
"Your shield.'
"Oh. About a month ago, something happened to it. I shorted
something, I guess, and the projection grid-it'S plastic-melted or
something. So it comes out like that. I sort of like it."
"What did it used to be?" They turned past bolts of fabric.
Denny gave a confidential whisper. "A frog."
With the woman, Kid thought all of a sudden, did that really happen?
People were screaming again. Below; Nightmare cried, "Hey, man,
look at that!· and his excited laugh.
They went into a stairwell: it was pitch-black. Three steps down Kid
said, "Wait up-"
Half a flight down, Denny asked, "What happened?'
"My sandal strap broke. I lost my sandal." Listening to Denny's
breathiog, Kid felt around with his feet, on the step above, on the one
below.
Denny suddenly stopped panting and said, "Hey; mank you."
"lean'dind it," Kid said. "Thanks for what?'
"I guess you saved my life."
"Huh?n
"That woman. She would have shot me if she got a chance.'
·Oh." Kid's toes stubbed the wall. "It wasn't anything. She would
have shot me too." He thought: a bee-bee gun? Fifteen-year-old Denny
was very young all of a sudden. "Damn thing's got to be around here
:n
"Lemme make alight," Denny said and made one.
Kid. moved to see if his sandal was under his shadow. "Maybe it fell
over ... " He glanced across the banister. "Look, never mind ... put that
out, will you." The luminous amoeboid collapsed. The stairwell filled
up with darkness, to his eyes, and over. "Can you hear anything?"
The pulsing blot on the black said, tentatively, "No."
"Come on then. • Kid started down.
"Okay,' was whispered in front of him.
-shot me if she got a chance: would she have if she recogoized me?
Or would I have wrested the rille if I hadn't recogoized her? (He collided softly with Denny's shoulder.) He thinks I saved his life. Whatbecause he saw light-are they doing out there? Shoulders bumping,
they walked into the silent first floor.
Denny stepped between racks of twUit tweed and corduroy.
Kid glanced at the figure standing just beyond the doorway beside
him (which was, of course, a dreSSing mirror, in a wooden stand,
1 338 Dhalgren
slightly tilted so that the reflected floor sloped) and-in a gym lockerroom,that opened onto the field, someone had once thrown snoW at
his naked back.
Looking, he re-experienced (and remembered) the moment. from
that Vermont winter. Then forgot it, looking at the reflectlOn, trymg to
recall now that he stared for a third, a fourth, a fifth second what had
struck him first, He raised his hand (the reflected hand raised),
his head a little (the head turned a little) took a breath (the reflectlOn
breathed)' he touched his vest (the reflection touched its khaki shirt)
then suddenly raised his hand to knuckle his chin (the reflection's
knuckle dug into its full, black beard) and blinked (its eyes blinked behind black plastic glass frames). .
The pants, he thought, the pants are the same! There was a whue
thread snaking across the black denim of his thigh. He (and the reflection) picked it warily away, suddenly arching his naked toes on the
pet (the tips of the black engineer boots flexed), then once more raised
his hand toward the glass. He opened his fingers (reflected fmgers
opened) the string dropped (the string dropped).
. gnarled knuckles and gnawed nails he looked at the
smooth undersides of fingers thinner than his own. (He's taller than I
am, Kid thought inanely, taller and stockier.) He hand,. to
look at his own palm: the yellowed callous was hned and lined agam,
deep enough for scars. Between his fingers he saw the backs of
with only the slightest hair, only the faintest scar above the
knuckle and a darkeniog at the left of the first joint. The
nails, though without moons save the thumbs, were long as hIS adolescent dreams, and only slightly dirty. He glanced down at other
hand. Where his was caged in blades, the reflection held-his
book? But the correspondence (he recalled the church clock With Its
broken hands) was toO banal for relief. Wanting to cry. he gazed full at
the face which mirroring him twitch to twitch, for all its beard and
glasses (and a s:nall brass ring in one earl) gazed back, with confusion,
desperation, and sadness.
The combination was terrifying.
"Hey," somebody said, "what you staring at?" grabbed the top of
mirror from the back, and yanked it down. It swiveled between Its
posts. The lower rim struck Kid's shins.
Kid reeled.
"You pickin' your pimpleS?" Copperhead grinned across the glass,
flat now like a table.
In Time of Plague 339
Astonished and angry. Kid lunged forward and brought his free fist
down against the mirror's near edge. The far rinl tore from Copperbead's loose fingers, scraped his chest, cracked his chin. The mirror
drifted down again.
Roaring and clutching his jaw, Copperhead danced between the
clothing racks. "Now what thefuck did you ... Arggg! Oh, my fuckin'
tongue, I think I bit ... Ahhhh! ... " The third time he looked up, he
just blinked.
Kid gulped air.
A ,triangle of glass slipped from the frame, broke again on the rug.
Beyond shatter lines he saw himself, barefoot and beardless, gasping
and rubbing the chains on his chest. At his hip the orchid flickered.
Some feet behind, Denny holding something in his arms, watched.
Kid torned in quarter-light.
"I got some ... " Denny looked at Copperhead, who rubbed and
glowered. "Over there, they got shoes and boots and things. I brought
you-" he hefted the armful- "these ...
UHuh?H
"'Cause you lost your shoe." Denny looked at Copperhead again.
Kid said: "You pickin' your pimples now?" Then he laughed. Started, it raced at hysteria. He was frightened.
A laugh, he thought, is a lot of dotted barkings. He laughed and
leaned against a table covered with shirts, and motioned Denny to come.
"You only wear the right one, hUh?" Denny dumped the shoesboots mostly-on the table.
Kid picked up two, tmee-they were aU right ones. He laughed
harder, and Denny grinned.
"What are you guys making all the God-danm noise forl" Nightmare called across the aisle. "Will you cut the God-danm hollering?"
Kid choked back both his laughter and his fear, picked out a moccasin boot of soft, rough-out black.
Denny watched gravely while Kid, holding the edge in one handwaving his orchid for balance-pushed in his foot.
Denny said, "That's the one I liked too."
Kid laughed again. Denny, higher, sharper, laughed too.
"I guess we scared them all upstairs," one girl said to Nightmare.
"Yoo bastards over here making enough noise to SCare anybody,"
Nightmare said.
"Hey," Kid said, "if I broke any of your teeth, I'm sorry. But don't
ruck with me any more, hearl"
340 Dhalgren
Copperhead mumbled and rubbed his scantily bearded jaw.
• All this shit going down, and vhf two of you got into it?" Nightmare rubbed his shoulder.
"Nightmare," Denny said, "the Kid saved my life. Upstairs, up on
the balcony. Somebody came at us with a gnn, shot at us as close as you
are to me. The Kid just grabbed the barrel and pulled it away."
"Yeah?"
A heavy scorpion behind Nightmare said: "Somebody was shootin'
down here too. n
"You gain' around savin' peoples' lives?" Nightmare said. ''You got
gnts in you a£ter all. Told you he was a good kid.»
Kid flexed his toes. The boot gave like canvas. Fear kept lanCing,
looking for focus, found one: He felt vastly embarrassed. A bee-bee
gnn, he thought, from some scared woman I ate dinner with, read a
poem to! He put his booted foot on the floor.
Denny looked hugely happy.
Nightmare pushed Copperhead's head to the side to examine it. "I
wouldn't mess with the Kid if I was you. First time I saw him, I didn't
like him either. But I said: Ifl ain'tgonna kiHhim, I ain't gonna mess
with him. That'd be best"
Copperhead pulled away from NightmareS inspection.
"There was something about him," Nightmare went on. "You nasty,
Copperhead, but you dumb. I'm tellin' you this 'cause I'm smarter than
you and I thought you'd like to know how to act. The Kid's smarter
than you too."
Behind teeth clamped and filled with tongue, Kid thought: Does he
want him to kill me, huh?
"He just grabbed the gun," DenRY repeated. "By the barrel. And
pulled it away."
"I'm gonna carry this on back to place," another white scorpion said, lugging a marble slab on which crouched a large, brass lion;
the blacks all seemed so silent, a reversal of his usual experience. The
lamp shade kept striking the boy's pimpled, unshaven chin. "I always
wanted one of these."
"You carry it," Nightmare said. "I ain't gonna help you. Let's get out
of here."
"There's still people up there with guns?" Copperhead took his hand
from his jaw to gesture at the dark mezzanine.
"Kid scared 'em away," the. black called D-t said.
Nightmare turned and bellowed so loud his knees and elbows bent:
In Time of Plague 341
"All right. motherfuckersl He ... we a ... ! You wanna shoot us. go on!" He
glanced around at the others and giggled. "God damn it. go on. pich us
off!" He started forward.
The unshaved, pimpled scorpion hefted the lion up on his belly.
turned his chin away to avoid the shade, and followed.
"You up' there. you better get us now! Come on. you mangy motherfuckers. you chicken-shit assholes! You aint gonna get another chan«l"
This. Kid thought walking between a tall, thin black (named Spider)
and the heavy one (called Cathedral: Kid slowed to let Copperhead get
a step ahead of them so he could see him), is insane. Laughter: only a
fragment blurted. Two of the others looked at him. Grinning, Kid
shook his head.
"You up the .... you better shoot!" Nightmare bawled at the mezzanine
rarling. "You dont. you some ... al scroungy cocksuckers!' He unscrewed
his face and said to Priest, who walked next to him:
"r heard you over on the other side, hollering. What were you
doing?"
"There was somebody in there. I don't think he had a gun. I chased
himupthe-"
"You better do it now, you son of a bitch!" Nightmare turned back to
the guy beside him. "Yeah? ... Do it. you do it. cocksucker, if you're
gonna do it, do it now!'
• -chased him up the stairs."
Lady of Spain had kicked in the board bottom of a display case.
Copperhead looked up, with consternation and surprise, and put his
boot through the glass case in front of him, first the top shelf, then the
bottom, then once on the other end; glass and watches scattered the
rug. Gasping, he loped to the next. Crash! and crash! and crash-crashcrash! All their eyes, Kid noted (trying to recall what it meant), are red
glass.
Another thin black frowned toward Kid, his lids narrowing over
blank crimson balls. He looked about Denny's age.
"You real chicken-shit up the .... you know!'
CRASH-CRASH!
"You ain't worth shit. god damn it! •
CRASH!
"Eat my shit . .. !" Nightmare looked around and smiled. 'Up your
ass! ... Fuck you! «
Lady of Spain pushed a whole case over; it smashed into the one behind it. She grinned at Copperhead who didn't see; others laughed.
342 Dhalgren
"They got the door locked.' Someone jiggled the handle.
"Here you go ... " Nightmare said, grabbing for !he Hon.
"Hey,no-"
Glass exploded over the pavement. Tke grey street was momentarily obscured by myriad bright prisms. "Come on!"
Kid stepped gingerly across the shards, remembering: On broken
glass, go flatfooted.
The white, unshaven scorpion stood (among others mOving) looking at his lamp. The marble base was in two pieces, the sbade crusbed.
Finally he stooped, caugbt up the injured object-a marble chip fell
but the cracked base stayed amazinglytogetber-and sbufl1ed on, kicking glass.
"Come on ... " Denny tugged Kid's arm.
Kid started walking again.
"A God-damn bus!" wbich hove around the corner. "How do you
like thatl"
Some stood in the street now, waving their arms.
the the curb. Nightmare at tbeir head, tbey crowded
between tbe folding doors. Shoulders collided. Through them, Kid saw
the bald, black driver's worried face.
"You gonna take us hamel" the thin black was saying, while the
others tried to push past. "Now that's convenient, brother! You gonna
takeus-!"
"AHHHH-!" shrill and directly intO Kid's ear.
Kid flinched and turned (A gun crack? There!) and grabbed the
black scorpion opening and closing his mouth and falling. Hooking
tbe post by the frODt seat with the elbow of his bladed arm, Kid swung
the wounded youth inside. As he fell, tbe unshaven guy (and some otheIS) no longer holding his lion, clambered over them- "Watch it-!"
Crouched at the top of the bus steps, Kid saw the crushed lamp shade
leaning against tbe sill. He grabbed the socket stalk, wrenched the
wbole thing up into the bus and as the doors closed he heard pingCRACK! The bus was moving: ping-CRACKI
He stood-everyone else was crouched in seats or between them.
Even the driver was hunkering oVer his wheel.
Outside, Kid saw the figure ina third story window oftbesandstone
wall (right beside the gold tin Emboriky)-Sigbting along the rifle, eye
to the finder.
the broken marble cut at his shin, joggling. Thirtypounds? As he
pulled the lion up Onto his forearm (so not to blUnt his orchid which
In Time of Plague 343
stuck from underneath) the bus lurched. "Here.· The stubbled face
turned up from the seat and blinked. "Here."
The scorpion wrapped his arms around it-the shade came completely off and joggled around the post-dropped his face, then raised
it, at the gasping.
Kid turned, holding the back of the seat.
Denny stopped at the reet of the wounded scorpion.
A woman in a grey hat, jammed against the window next to Nightmare, said, 'Oh dear! Oh, he's terribly hurt-" then put both hands flat
against the pane when Kid looked at her, and began to cry. Then she
stopped, faced forward again with her eyes closed.
From a rear seat: "Say . .. "
No one said.
' ... what happened to you guys?"
No One answered.
Kid took off his orchid and poked a around for his belt loop
till he saw (remembering) it had broken. So he hung it from his chain
and squatled.
'Annnnnnnn-waa! They got my ... arm. I ... Annnn'"
Denny looked up: his very blue eyes were bloodshot
'Annnnnn-ah. Awww? ... Oh, hey. Awwwee ... !"
Warm blood touched Kid's toes and spread.
ed.
"You want to make a tourniquet or something ... " Denny suggest-
"Awwwwwwww-Ahhh ... "
·Yeah."
"Here!" The colored girl in ,the front seat leaned forward holding a
SCarf, and almost dropped it when Kid reached. The scorpion panted
like a woman in childbirth while Kid tightened the looped cloth on the
handle of a knife one of the others gave him. 'You gotta loosen it," he
told Spider who was helping. "Every five minutes or so. So he doesn't
get gangrene or something." Then he sat back on his heels, jogging
with the bus. The driver looked back, then turned a corner.
Nightmare, forearms across his knees, was watching them with interest. "You really into this hero bit. Tourniquet, hub? That's pretty
good. Yeah, I like that."
Kid stood, about to look disgusted: pain shot up his calves from the
minutes spent crouched. So he didn't look anything, walked to Dennys
seat, and sat.
Across the aisle, tbe old man with his head in his coat collar, who
344 Dha!gren
had been Oil the bus when it had been going in the other direction, pretended to sleep.
"You okay?" Denny asked. "You look ... "
Kid turned to the boy (two others, a scorpion and a passenger, were
just turning away): Denny rubbed beneath his nose, blinked his blueThe memory of crimson eyes in the Emborikyl; lobby made Kid open
his mouth: The eyes that watched now, intently and compassionately,
became horrible as the discovered Significance of what he had forgotten. SurpriSe blotted another memory-he felt it fade from his mind,
struggled to keep it, failed-of something passed in a looking glass.
What could he have seen in a mirror? Himself? Nothing else? I'm mad,
he thought: like echo, This is insane, he had said there. Stripped of context-what had happened in the department store?-he shook before
what it could have signified. Why did I say, This is insane? Something
shook in him. His head waggled.
"Kid ... ?" which Kid was desperately aware was not his name.
Denny:' hand had been on his forearm. He knew because now it
moved away. Released, he ,tried to remember having been held, fixed
by the warmth was fading, had faded. Denny rubbed his upper lip
again.
4
Breathing heavily, Kid sat back in the jogging seat.
Ourside, movie marquees passed in cryptic cavalcade.
Under ltigh, electric notes, low, wet ones burbled and troughed and
erupted. A metallic chord; another metallic chord. Between them: tapehiss.
Kid cleared his throat; it became a cough.
"Yes?" Reverend Taylor held her pencil by both ends. "Can I help
you? !I
"I'm hungry," Kid said. ·Um ... " He pulled his hands from the halfdoor's sill. "Some ... somebody told me you used to have a free supper here?"
"Oh, we discontinued that some time back-" Behind her, like revolving eyes, the spools turned.
Kid took a breath. "Yeah, I know •.. '
"Did you fall ... or hurt yourself?"
"Huh? NOt I ... no.'"
"You're just hungry?"
In Time of Plague 345
matam. n
"Really, we're not providing that service any longer, you see. It was
far too ... " Now she let her eyes drop, sucked her teeth, and considered: "Well, perhaps coffee? And ... " She looked up. "Maybe there's
something ... and you can Sit down for a litde while.'
"Vest ma'am.'"
Wheels and swivel roared and squeaked through the music as she
pushed away her chair. ·Come with me." She stepped to the door, fluttering black robes.
He stepped back wltile she came through, followed her across the
vestibule-"Now, you understand I'm not establishing a tradition. Just
this once: I am not opening up the Evening Aid Program again. Tbis is
for you tonight. Not for your friends tomorrow" -and down a stairway.
"Yes, ma'am. tt
At the bottom, Reverend Taylor turned on a caged work light hung
on a nail. A high windoWsill, level with the street ourside, went from
blue to black. The heavy cord curved up the steps. "Lets see what we
have."
Columns fanned tltick shadows across the basement auditorium.
Folding chairs were stacked by one wall. A half-collapsed sofa sat by
another. Before the closed curtains of a stage was an upright piano, hs
works bare.
"We're having a service this evening in the chapel upstairs. In just
a little while. Maybe if you feel up to it, you can come upstairs to the
chapel and join us."
Another ltigh window was open. 'he Slight gust made him look instead of answer. Three leaves jittered to the srllsedge; one spun, before
faUing. It ticked down the wall, clicked on the piled chairs, to stop at
the scuffed linoleum, like an erratic tick-tocking at last run down.
"In here." Reverend Taylor waited by another door.
Inside, she snapped on another work light.
Across a long, newspaper-covered table, Kid saw a wall hung with
pots, potato mashers, colanders, and shelves stacked with thick,
church-kitchen crockery. "We were able to get bread for a wltile, I mean
in large quantities. So we could make tinned meats sandwiches-that's
when we had Evening Aid. But we lost onr source. Without the staff of
life, such a program dries up qUickly. Beans take too long to cook and
I didn't have the help for it" From a wall cabinet she took a can dotted with white paper where the label had been removed. "Beef stew."
He took it from her.
346 Dhalgren
"Taking the labels olI," she explained to his questioning expression,
"is one minor way to discourage pilfering. I don't like to put locks on
things. Snoopers look in on shelves full of blank cans, and don't know
whether it's rat poison, motor oil, or green peas. I just have to remember what's where." She tried to look sly. "I have my own system. You
must know how these camp stoves work if you've been here any length
,of time . _. 1D
"Yeah," wondering whether he should explain that he'd learned,
however, on a camping trip when he was twelve.
"The urn ,there is hot. I keep it going all day. I'm sure I'm drinking
too much colIee. Can I more or less leave you on your own? I've got
to get back to my notes."
"Sure. Thank you, ma'am. n
"wash things up; and let me know when you leave?"
He nodded.
At the kitchen door; she frowned, dark and broad. 'You're sure you
didn't have some sort of accident? I mean, you're aU smudged up there
on the side."
"Huh? ... oh, I'm all right noW. Really."
Setting her lips at a blunt, black roundness, she nodded curtly, and
left.
Looking over the pans and pOlS, he thought: No can-opener, and
panicked.
It lay beside the stove.
He twisted and twisted till the last metal scollop popped, and the
can-top, lapped with gravy, began to sink. He looked at the stove, at
the can; then something happened in his gut. He went in with fingers,
shaved grease, meat, and vegetable chunks into his mouth, licked cold
gravy from his hand, wiped what ran on his chin with his forefinger
and sucked that.
His stomach bubbled, clamped twice, hard, and he had a mouthful
of gas still tasting of Bunnys wine. Anticipating nausea, he stopped,
for several deep breaths. Then he took the can out, sat on the sagging
sofa, and pushed his hand back into the ragged ring.
He chewed and licked and swallowed and sucked and licked.
When the coppered inside was clean except for the bottom corner
for which his middle finger had been 100 thick, he returned to the
kitchen, rinsed the can, and let black colIee steam into it from the urn's
plastic spigot. Hot tin between his hands made him aware of his dry
left, his sticky right.
In Time of Plague 3'17
Back on the couch, holding it between his knees, he watched the
steam and grew sleepy, tasted (hot, bitter) some, decided he didn't want
it, and let his eyes close ...
"Yes, he's right here," Reverend Taylor was saying.
Kid blinked awake. He had put the coffee on the arm of the sofa before he drifted off.
"I don't think he's feeliog too-oh."
Kid took the can in his fist to hide beltind sipping-tepid.
"Ah," said Mr Newboy. "Thank you."
Kid set the colIee on the arm again.
"Ah," Reve.rend Taylor repeated, but in such a different tone Kid
only identified the similarity seconds later, "you got yourself something
to eat?»
"Yes, ma'am. n
"Good." Reverend Taylor beamed at Newboy, swept around him,
and said, disappearing, "You'll excuse me. 1 must get back."
"I'm terribly glad I found you!" Mr Newboy carried a briefcase before him, with naked eagerness on his face.
"What'd you want?" Kid's body still tingled from sleep. "How did
you know 1 was here?"
Newboy hesitated before the couch (Kid glanced at the plush and
thought: It is pretty dusty), sat. "Just another evidence of the smallness of the city. Your friend in the baT-the big, blond man-"
"Tak?"
"-Yes, that's him. He saw you getting alI a bus and coming in nhis
direction. He thought you'd eventually get to Thddys. When you didn't,
I decided to wander over here in case you were still around. I'd never
seen this place. And I'm going to be leaving Bellona, soon. Tomorrow
morning, actually. n
"Oh," Kid said. "He just saw me3 ... and you're leaving? Hey, that's
too bad.· Fighting the tingling and the sluggishness, he pushed himself up and started toward the kitchen. "You want some coffee Mr
Newboy?" '
"Thank you," Newboy said, and called, "Yes."
"What-" through the doorway-"did you want to see me about?"
In the white crock, the coffee ploshed and plopped. Outside Mr
Newboy was unsnapping his case.
"I don't know where the millt and sugar is."
"I take it black."
Kid released the plastic spigOt, moved a second cup under for him-
348 Dhalgren
self (the stuff in the can: cold) and carried them, out to the couch, the
foreknuckles of both hands burning.
"Oh, thank you."
"What-" sitting next to Newboy-"did you want to see me about?"
"Well. I thought you'd like to take a look at these." Wide n'bbons of
paper came up from the plaid lining. "And these." Now a sheaf of black
paper. "And this. This is the cover."
On thick, textured paper, were the centered letters:
BRASS
ORCHIDS
He took the-nOh, my hands aren't too clean ... "
"Go on) this is just a sample.lI
-took the cover, which suddenly carved down as he held it by the
corner, propped it with his other hand and read again:
BRASS
ORCHIDS
"And those are the galleys, which you have to look over." Mr Newboy indicated the papers lying now across Kid's knee. "Fortunately, it
isn't too long. Thirty-six pages, I believe. Counting cover. There may
be some awful mistakes. It'll be printed on slightly better paper than
that. I'd argued for a larger typeface-"
BRASS
ORCIDDS
"-but Roger explained, something I suppose were all aware of, that
here in Bellona we often have to make do."
"Oh, yeah." Kid looked up and let the title of his book embed that
part of his consciousness reserved for reality, while he expunged it from
the part called dream. The transition came easy, but with a firmness
and inevitability he associated with comprehending violence. He was
joyous, and upset, but could just distinguish that the reactions were
contiguous:! not consequent.
"These are the illustrations. Again, we have Rogers sense ·of theatricality to contend with. I'm not at all sure they're in good taste.
Frankly, I don't think poetry needs iUustration. But he asked me to
show them to you: the decision is yours, ultimately.'
In Time of Plague 349
He was about to say, They're all black, when he caught glintings in
the matte stock.
"They're black ink On black paper," Mr N ewboy explained. "The
only way you can really see them is to hold them up to the light and
look at them from the side. Then the light catches the ink. Roger feels
that since the poems take so much of their imagery from the city, he's
used some of what he feels are the most striking pictures from his
newspaper. But he's ptinted them this way-I don't believe theres been
any effort to correlate particular pictures with particular poems.'
Kid nodded. "Thats a good idea." He tilted another picture to catch,
in suddensilverpoint, burning buildings, people gaping,. and one child,
in the foreground, leering into the camera. nOh, yeah!· he laughed, and
looked through the others.
"Have you any idea when you'll be able to look over the proofs? The
TImes is notorious for typos. Your book was set OR the same machinery."
"I could do it now." Kid put down ,the pictures and picked up the
gaUeys. "How many pages did you say it was?'
"Thirty-six. I went over it once myself against your notebook-we'd
rather hoped for a typesctipt;and when you pushed that into my hands,
that evening, I was a bit worried. But your fair copies are very neat. You
know, you have at least four completely distinct handwritings?"
"ilt'S never been: too good. n
"But your printings perfectly legible.· Newboy pawed in the case.
"Here ... " He gave Kid the notebook.
It fell open in Kid's hands:
Poetry; fiction, drama-I am only interested in ...
Kid turned back the book to the page with his poem (a middle draft
of "Elegy') , then picked up the galleys. Moving ribbon from ribbon on
his lap, saw, printed, ELEGY go by, and caught his breath. The letters
were so much sharper and more serene than ink on notebook paper.
He let a random line of print tug his eyes across. Words detonated
memories intense enough to blot the fact that they were not his-or,
alleast, this wasn't ... or ... Behind his lips the teeth hung open; now
his lips puliedapart. He took a si!lent breath. My poem, he thought,
terribly exCited, terribly happy.
"I CQuldn't help reading some of your notes. I've always found it
amusing, writers pouring out pages and pages of analysis on why ,they
can not write-lord knows I've done it myself."
"Huh?"
"There were many, many places where 1 found your aesthetic analysis let me into some of the more difficult things you were trying to do
350 Dhalgren
in the actual work." Mr Newboy picked up his colIee cup. "You have a
fascinating critical mind, and quite a bit of insight into the problems
of the poem. It made me reel closer to you. And of course, the most important thing is that the poems themselves deepen considerably in the
light of your-"
Kid's head was shaking. ·Oh ... " He closed his mouth again,opened
it, with ,a moment's urge, luminous in its strength, to allow misconcep.
tion to become deception.
Newboy paused.
Blinking through the after urge, the pause indicating he was already
found out (he pawed his fragmented memory for some previous intent
to deceive, to support him in what he wished to reveal), said: "All that
other stuff-hey. I didn't write that."
Newboy's grey head Went a bit to the side.
"I just found the notebook." The desperation of embarrassment subsided, his heart was left hammering heavily and slowly. "It was all filled
up with writing, but just on one side of the page. So I used the other
sides for •.. my stuff." A final pulse of heat behind his eyes.
·Oh," Newboy said trying to retain his smile, "this is embarrassing.
You didn't write those journal sections?"
"No, sir. Only the poems. "
"Oh, I ... well, I guess ... oh, really. I am sorry." Newboy let the
smile become laughter. "Well, I really reel that, once more, I've made
myself look quite silly."
"You? No," Kid said, and discovered hlmself angry. "I sho"ld have
said something. I just didn't think of it when I gave it to you that
evening. ReaRy."
"Of course," Mr Newboy said. "No, I Simply mean your poems are
your poems. They exist of themselves. In the same way nothing I could
say about them is going to change what they are, nothing you could
say-or anything I mistakenly thought you said-is going to change
that either."
"You think thars true?"
Newboy pursed his lips. "Actually. I don't know whether irs true or
not. But truly I don't see how any poet can write who doesnt think so.»
"Why are you going away. Mr Newboy?" Kid had begun the: question
to make a connection: But now it seemed equally apt for severing one,
and Newboy's embarrassment and his own confusion seemed better left.
"Can't you work here very well? Bellona doesn't stimulate you?"
Newboy accepted ,the severance, acknowledging his acceptance
In Time of Plague 351
with another sip. "In a way. I suppose you're right. Every once in a
while something comes along to remind me that I am-though not as
often as I would sometimes like-after all, a poet. What is it Mr
GraYes says? All poetry is ahout love, death, or the changing of the
seasons. Well, here the seasons do not change. So I'm leaving.» Behind
coiled steam, the grey eyes gleamed. "After all. I'm only a visitor. But
cil:Cumstances seem- to have contrived to change that status with a rapidity thoroughly disquieting." He shook his head. "I've met some
yery pleasant people, seen some fascinating things, had a wealth of rich
experiences-just the way the city was represented to me. I certainly
haven't been disappointed."
"But not all of the things that happened to you were pleasant?"
"Are they ever? No, Roger has arranged to get me as far as Helmsford.
There some people can take me to u.kesville. There's still transportation
there. I can get a bus across to ,the airport at Pittsblain. Then-back to
civilization. n
"What was so unpleasant here?"
"Not the least was my initial meeting with you."
"At Teddy's?" Kid was surprised.
Newboy frowned. ·Outside the wall, in back of Roger's."
"Oh. Oh, yeah. That.· He sat back a little on the couch. The projector rolled between his vest flaps. He did not glance down, and felt
uncomfortable.
"Inside those walls, I'm afraid," Newboy pondered, "are all the intrigues and personality clashes that-well, that one might imagine at
a place like Roger's. And they are beginning to bore me..· He Sighed. "\
suppose such things bave driven me from one city to another all my
life. No, I can't say Bellona was misrepresented. But even for me, at my
age, not all of its lessons have been kind."
'1esus," Kid said. "What's been happening at-"
"There are, if I can oversimplify," Newboy went on (Kid took a long
breath and picked up his coffee), "two concepts of the artist. The one
gives ill to his work, in a very real way; ifhe does not produce volumes,
atleast he goes through many. mitnydrafts. He neglects his life, and his
life totters and sways and often plummets into chaos. It is presumptuous of "5 to judge him unhappy: or, when he is obviously unhappy. to
judge the source of it. Be thankful for him; be lends art all its romance,
its energy, and creates that absolutely necessary appeal to the adolescent mind without which adult maturation is itupossible. If he is a
Writer, he hurls his words into the pools of our ,thought. Granted the
352 Dhalgrrn
accuracy of the splashes, Ibe waves tremendous and glitter and flash
in the light of our consciousness. You Americans-not to mention the
Australians-are extraordinarily fond orrum. But ther" is another concept, a more EuroP""n concept-one of the few concepts Europe shares
with the Orient-that includes Sp"nser and Chaucer, but excludes
Shakespeare, that includes the Cavaliers and Ihe Metaphysicals, but by.
passes the Romantics: the artist who gives hls all to life, ,to living within some sort of perfected ideal. Sometime in his past, he has discovered
he is ... Jet us say. a poet: that certain situations, certain convergences
of situations-usually too complicated for him to understand wholly.
as they propitiously juxtapose conscious will with unconscious passion-theysomething-between-cause-and-allow a poem. He dedicates
himself to living, according to his concepts, the civilized life in wruch
poetry exists because it is part ·of civilization. He risks as mnch as his
cousin. He generally produces fewer works, with greater intervals between them, and constantly must contend with the possibility that he
will never write again if his life should so dictate-a good deal of his
civilized energies must go toward resigning rumself to the insignificance
of his art, into the suppression of that theatrical side of his peISOnality
of which ambition is only a small part. He stands much closer to the
pool. He does not hurl. He drops. Accuracy is again all-important: there
are some people who can hit bulFs eye from a quarter of a mile while
others cannot touch the target at ten feet. Given it, the patterns and
ripples thls sort of artist produces can be far more intricate, if they lack
the initial appearance of force. He is much male a victim of the civilization in which he lives: his greatest works come from the periods art
historians grossly call 'conducive to aesthetic production.' 1 say he
stands very close to the pools; indeed, he spends most of his time simply gazing into them. Myself, I rather aspire to be second type of
artist. 1 came to Bellona to explore. And 1 find the entire culture here1 cannot be kind-completely parasitic ... saprophytic. 1t infectseven inside Roger's carefully closed estate. Its not conducive to my concept of the good life, therefore, if only terllarily, it damages all my
imp..tses toward art. I would like to lie a good peISOn. But its too difficult here. I suspect thatS cowardly, but its true. "
The coffee, prompting a memory that would not resolve, was again
cold in his mouth. °Mr Newboy-" he swaUowed and was pensive-
"do you think a bad person can be a good poet? ... or is that a silly
question?"
·Not if you're essentially questioning yourself. 1 mean, we suspect
In Time of Plague 353
YJlI)on went on to murder and died by the noose. But-and what a
dreadfully unpopular notion-he might just as well have Simply been
writing about the strange people he knew around him; and, when they
got him into trouble, gave up IDs bad company. abandoned writing,
changed his name, and went on to die a peaceful burgher in another
town. From a perfectly practical point of view....."nd one would have
had to have written fairly well to appreciate the practicality-l would
imagine the answer is that it would be quite difficult. But it would be
absurd of me to pronounce it impossible. Frankly, I don't knOw."
When Kid looked up, he was surprised to see the elderly gentleman
smiling straight at him.
·But that question is just your natural idealism speaking." Newboy
turned a little on his cushion .• All good poets lend to be idealistic.
They also tend to be lazy. acrimonious, and power-crazed. Put any two
of them together and they invariably talk about money. I suspect their
best work tries to reconcile what they are with what they know and
feel they should be-to fit them into the same universe. Certainly those
three are three of my own trailS, and I know they often belong as well
to some very Ilad men. Should I triumph over my lazwess, however, I
suspect 1 would banish aU feeling for economical expression which is
the basis of style, If! overcame my bitterness, beat it out of my person
for good, fm afraid my work would lose all wit and irony. Were 1 to
defeat my power-madness, my craving for fame and recognition, 1 suspect my work would become empty of all psychological insight, not to
mention compassion for others who share such failings. Minus all
three, we have work concerned only with the truth, which is trivial
without ,those guys that mOor it to the world that is the case. But we
ate wandering toward questions of doing evil versus the capacity for
doing evil, innocence, choice, and freedom. Ah, well, during the Middle Ages, religion was often able to redeem art. Today. however, art is
about the only thing that can redeem religion, and the clerics will never
forgive us that." Newboy glanced at the ceiling and shook his head.
Dulled organ music came fIOm the stair. He looked down into his case.
"! guess what 1 want to know, r"aHy-" Kids thumb had stained the
galley margin: momentary panic. ·Do you think these--" and four fin·
gers marked the paper in a sweep-·that these are any good?" There
will be other copies, he thought to ease himself. There will be. ·1 mean,
really."
Newboy sucked his teeth and put the case on the floor against his
leg. ·You have no realization what a'n absurd question that is. Once,
354 Dhalgren
when I used to aDd myself in this situation, I would always answer 'no'
automatically, 'I think they're worthless.' But I'm older, and I realize
now aliI was doing was punishiRg people who asked such questions
for their st11pidity. and was only being 'honest' in the most semantically
vulgar sense. I really cannot think about poetry in such absolute terms
as 'good' and 'bad: or even in the more flexible terms you'd probably
be willing to accept in their place: 'well done' or 'badly done.' Perhaps
it is because I suffer from all the aesthetic diseases of the times which
cause the worthless to be praised and the worthy to be ignored. Well,
they have ravaged aU ages. But you must leave open the possibility that
poetry means far too much to me to vulgarize it in the way you are asking me ,to do. The problem is essentially one ·of landscape. I've already
made it I hope, that I, personally; have enjoyed the particular
complex of inten:hange between you and your poems, bOlh as I have
perceived it and, to my personal embarrassment, mispetceived it. If
you think my distance insulting, dwell on the complexities in it. But
let me pose an example. You know of Wilfred Owen?" Newboy did not
wait for Kid's nod. "Like many young men, he wrote his poems during
the Great War; he seems to have hated that war, but he fought in it, and
was machine-gunned to death while trying to get his company over the
Sambre Canal when he was younger than you. He is generally considered, in English, the greatest war poet. But how is one to compare him
to Auden or O'Hara, Coleridge or Campion, Riding or Roethke, Rod or
Edward Taylor, Spicer, Ashbery; Donne, Waldman, Byron or Berrigan
or Michael Dennis Browne? As war-the experience or the conceptstays a vitalimage, Owen will stay i vital poet. If war were to be both
abolished andfoIgolten, then Owen would become a minor figure, interesting only as a purely philological point in the development of the
language, as an influence on more germane figures. Now your poems
wrap themselves around and within this city as Cavafy's twist and refract about pre-World War Two Alexandria, as Olson's are caught in the
ocean light of tnid-century Gloucester .... or Vilion's in medieval Paris.
When you ask me the worth of these poems, you are asking me what
place the image of this ciry holds in the minds of those who have never
been here. How can I presume to suggest? There are times, as I waRder in this abysmal mist, when these streets seem to underpin all the
capitals of the world. At others, I confess, the whole place seems a
pOintless and ugly mistake, with no relation to what I know as civilization, better obliterated than abandoned. I can't judge because I am
still in iI, Frankly! will not be able to judge Once out <lfit, for the bias
that will remain from once having been a visitor."
In Time of Plague 355
kid, halfway through the second poem in proof, looked up at the
silence.
"The worlh of our work?" (Kid dropped his eyes and continued
reading.) 'People who do not croate are always sure that on some inchoate level the creator knows it. But the rosIer of Nobel laureates I
have come so near to joining three times now is cluttered with
mediocre writers who have neither elegance nor depth, readability nor
relevante: lauded during their lifetimes, they died, I'm sure, convinced
they had substantially advanced their languages. Your Miss Dickinson
died equally convinced nO one would ever read a word she wrote; and
she is one of the most luminous poets your country has produced. An
artist Simply cannot trust any public emblem of merit. Private ones?
They are even more misleading. rIO
Kid turned over the next galley. "You're talking to yourself." Eyes
doWn, he wondered what expression was on Newboy's face.
"Most certainly;" Newboy said after a longish pause.
"You're really that scared your own stulf isn't any good."
Newboy paused.
In me pause, Kid considered looking up but didn't.
"When I'm not actually working, I have no choice: I must consider
it worthless. But when I'm engaged in it, writing, revising, shaping and
polishing, by the same process, I have 10 consider it the most imporlantlhing in the world. And I'm very suspect of any other attitude."
Kid looked up now: the expression leaving Newboy's face was serious. But laughter marks were replacing it. "Ah, when I was a young
man, as young as lance thought you were, I recall I labored with ineredible diligence over a translation of 'Le Bateau iv .... ' Here I am at the
respectable, if a bit garrulous, threshold of old age, and last night, in
the front library at Roger's, after everyone else had gone up, I sat there
working-by hurricane lantern: the electricity is off in that wing
now-on 'Le Cimetitre marin.' The impulse was thoroughly the same. "
He shook his head, stiR laughing. "Have you found any mistakes?"
"Urn: Kid said. "Not in the first three sheets."
"I spent yesterday and most of l<lday checking it against your fair
Copy. I've put a couple of queries here and there. Yoa'll get to them as
you go through.'
"The first ones' near the front." Newboy set down his cup and leaned
over Kids shoulder. "Next sheet. There, It's a poem you had a loose
copy of on blue paper, just stuck in the notebook. It looked like somebody else had written it out for you. Did you perhaps intend a comma
356 Dhalgrtn
in the third line? 1 checked it back with the version in your notebook,
and neither one has it. Except for the phrasing, 1 wouldn't have-"
"The copy in the notebook has a comma, doesn't it?" Kid frowned
and flipped handwritten pages. His eyes stumbled among words, try.
ing not to be caught between any two, till he found the notebook Fage.
"It's not (here." Helooked up, "I thought 1 put onein." .
"Then you did intend it. Here, use my pencil. Just cross out the
question mark 1 put by the line. 1 had a feeling you might-what's the
matted"
"1 thought 1 had a comma there. But I didn't."
"Oh, I'm always discoveriDg I've left out words 1 was sure 1 wrote
down in the fJISt draft-"
wYou ... n
Mr Newboy started to question. grew uncomfortable with that, so
returned his eyes {Q the line.
" ... just read it and knew I'd wanted one there?"
Newboy began to say several things, but stopped (after a little nod)
before voice, as if curious what silence would effect.
Two emotions clawed the inside o(Kidl; skull. The fear, as it rose, he
questioned: Is this some Irick of the autonomic nerves that causes the
small of my back to dampen, my heart to qUicken, my knees to shake
like motors? It was only a comma, the smallest bit of silence !hat 1 had
misplaced-only a pause. 1 am quaking like leddy's candles. The joy,
mounting over, obliterating, and outdistancing it, was at some sensed
communion. (Newboy had knownl) To restrain it, Kid told himself: Between two phmses like that, why shouldn't Newboy be able to tell? He
lowered his head to read on: his eyes filled with water and the emotion
tore 1!brough such logic. And the darkness under. He anticipated their
collision to make some wave. But like two swirls of opposite spin, they
met-iUld canceled. He blinked. Water splashed from his lashes across
the back of his hand.
Thore had been a recurrent pain on the back of his right shoulder
that, three or four years ago, had intrigued him because it would be a
pulsing annoyance for hours or even days and then would, in a second, vanish: no proddings or contortions could recall it. He hadrr t for
years ...
Tensing his shoulder, he read the Rext poem, and images set to at
the backs of his eyes, their substaDce and structure familiar, their texture alien, alien and grave. He kept blinkiRg,to finish the line in his
mind; eyes opened to finish it on the page, where it demanded new
In Time of Plaguo 357
bulbs. Boxes of glass ticked their clear covers on stunned marvels.
Things were safe, and that was so horrifying his heart was pulsing in
the little pit at the base of his throat as though he were swallOwing rock
after rock. "Mr Newboy?"
"Mmm?" Papers shumed.
Kid looked over.
Newboy was going through the illustrations.
"I don't think I'm gonna write any more poems."
Newboy turned another black page. "You don't like them, reading
them over?'"
Kid peeled off the next paper ribbon. The first two words of the first
line of the first poem were transposed-
"Here!" Mr Newboy offered his pencil. "You found a mistake?" He
laughed. "Now see, you don't have to write quite so hard as that! Wait!
You'll tear the paper!"
Kid unhunched his shoulder, unbent his spine, and let his fingers
relax about the yellow shaft. He breathed again. "They're going to fix
that, arenrt they?"
"Oh, yes. Thats why you're looking it over now."
Kid read, and rememberro: "The parts 1 like, well ... " He shook his
head, with pursed lips. "They just don't have anything to do with me:
somebody else wrote them, it seems, about things I may have thought
about once. That's pretty straRge. The parts I don't like-well, I can remember writing those,oh yeah, word by word by word.'
"Then why aren't you going to write any-?"
But Kid had found another mistake.
"Here," Newboy said. "Wby don't you lay the galleys on your notebook so you can write more easily."
Wbile Kid passed the halfpoint of the next galley, Newboy mused:
"Perhaps its good you're not going to write any more: you'd have to start
considering all those dull things like your relation to your audience, the
relation between your personality and your poetry, the relation between
your poetry and all the poetry before it. Since you told me you weren't
responsible for those notes, I've been trying to figure out whether it just
happened or whether you were making a conscious reference: You managed to reproduce, practically verbatim, one of my ravorite liRes from
Golding'S translation of the Metamorphosis.'
qMmm?"
"Are you familiar with it?"
"It's a big green and white paperback? That's the one Shakespeare
358 Dhalgmt
used for some of his plays. I only read about the first half. But I didn't
take any lines from it, at least not on purpose. Maybe it just happened?"
Mr Newboy nodded. "You amaze me. And when yon do, I suspect
I'm rather a smaller person for having such petty notions in me first
place. Well, the line I was referring to was from the last book aliyway.
$0 you hadn't gotten to that one yet. TeU'me, who dayou think should
read your poems once they're published]"
"I guess people who ... well, who.ever likes to read poetry."
"Do you?"
·Yeah. I read it mOre than I anything else, I guess."
"NOr that doesn't surprise me."
"You know; in bookstores for the schools I used to go to, or down
in the Village in New York, orin San Fli3ncisco, they got whole sections
for poetry. You can read a lot ofit there."
"Why poetry?"
Kid shrugged. "Most poems are shorter than stOries."
Newboy. Kid saw; was suppressing a laugh. Kid felt embarrassed.
"And you're not going to write anymore?"
"Itl; too hard." Kid looked down. "I mean ifl kept it up, I think it
would kill me, you know? I never did it before, So 1 just didn't understand."
"That's sad-no, I can be more honest than thaI. ItS frightening for
one artist to see another one, any other one ,turn away from art.1)
"Yeah." Kid's eyes came up. "I know. I reaUy know that. And I
wish-l wish I didn't frighten you as much as I do. What is it? What's
·the matter with you, now?"
"Nothing." Newboy shook his head.
"I wish I didn't," Kid repeated. "The last poem ... n Kid began to
tum through the galleys. "What did you think of that one, 1 mean compared to all tbe rest of them?"
"Tbe one in meter? Well, it isn't finished. We printed it up to where
you broke off. That's another thing I waRted to query about-"
"How do you like what there is?"
"Frankly. I didn't thinkitwas as strong as many of the others. When
I went back over it the fourth or fiflh time, I began (a see that the substance of it was probably on its way to a great deal of richness. But the
language wasn't as inventive. Or as clean. n.
Kid nodded. "The rhythm of natural Kid mused. "I had to
write it. And it was pretty bad, wasn't it? No, I don't think I'll write
In Time of Plague 359
lilly more. Besides, I'm probably never going to have another book published ... ?" He raised an eyebrow at Newboy.
Newboy. lips pursed, considered. "I could say that I Sincerely don't
believe that should be a consideration. Or that, as I rememberi!, it was
sotnething like eleven years between my first and second book of
poems. Or that I think you're asking for confirmation of something that
really doesn't have anything,to do with poetry."
"What else could you say?"
Newboy's lips unpursed. "I could say. 'Yes, possibly you won't.'"
Kid grinned qUickly and went back to correcting.
"It's very silly to commit yourself to something like that, if you're
going to write or not. If you wrote these, you will write more. And if
you promiSe yourself you won't, you'll just be very unhappy when you
break the promise. Yes, a good part of me doesn't like the idea of an
artist giving up art. But that is another part of me talking. Believe me."
Kid's mind was on umya.
He pulled it away. to reRect on: Golding's Metamorphosis. He'd seen
the book on a dozen shelves in a dozen bookstores, picked it up as
many times, read the back cover, the first page of the introduction,
flipped through three or four pages, unable to read more than three or
fOllr lines 'On each. (The same thing, he realized, had happened with
Pilgrimage.) The first half? He'd been unable to read a whole page! Poetry. he thought. If it makes me start lying to a guy like this, I should
stop writing it.
Kid corrected the last half-dozen sheets in silence drenched with vision. He flipped them, rattling like dry feathers, together.
He leaned on the couch arm (he breathed gently: but felt breath's
coolness only on the left side of his upper lip) and looked at the paper
over his lap. I've just corrected the last half-dozen sheets, he thought:
bis upper arms were bone tired. Pains pulsed in his finger joints. He
loosened his grip on the pencil.
The litle-page, he noticed now; read:
BRASS
ORCHIDS
BY
He started to smile; the muscles of hiS mouth blocked it.
Mr Newboy. gone to the kitchen, relumed now with another steaming cup.
360 Dhalgren
"I guess-" the smile broke through-"you better take the 'by' off
the title page."
"Ah," Mr Newboy raised his chin. "That does bring up a sort of strange
subject. I talked to your friend Mr Loufer. And he told me about-"
"I mean it:. okay." Kid said. "1 think it would be a good idea if it
came out with no name. AnonymOUSly."
"Mr Loufer said that you're-rather picturesquely-called 'the Kid'
by many of your friends?"
"That would look pretty stupid," Kid said. "'Poems by the Kid.' I
think it would be better with nothing. n Somewhere beneath the trung
inside that made him smile, there was the beginnings of embarrassment. He Sighed, still smiling.
Gravely. Mr Newboy said: "If you really feel that way. I'll tell Roger.
Are you finiShed looking them over?"
"Yeah."
"That was qUick. How were they?"
RUb, fine. 1 mean not tbat many mistakes.'
good. II
"Hete. 12
"Oh, are you sure you wouldn't like to keep the notebook?"
It was opened back in the middle. Kid lowered the papeIS to his lap.
To avoid the feeling of confusion he le.t his eyes take the pageS open.
ing lines:
Poetry, fiction, drama-I am interested in the arts of incident only
so far as fiction touches life; oh no, not in any vulgar, autobiographical sens", rather at the level of the most crystalline carre·
spondence. Consider: If an author, passing a mirror, were to see one
day not himself but some character of his invention, though he might
be surprised, might even question his sanity, he would still have
something by which to relate. But suppose, passing on the inside, the
character should glance at his mirror and see, not himself, but the
author, a complete stranger, staring in at him, to whom h. has no relation at all, what is this poor creature left . .. ?
Newboy was saying, "You're all sure now that you don't want to
write again. But be certain, inspiration will come, arriving like one of
Rilke's angels, so dazzled by its celestial journey it will have completely
forgotten the message. entrusted to it yet effectively delivering it merely through its marvelous presence-"
In Time of Plague 361
"Here!" Kid thrust out galleys and notebook. "Please take it! Please
take it all. Maybe ... 1 mean, maybe you'll want to check something
else." He watched his extended hands sway to his thumping heart.
"All right," Newboysaid. "No, you keep the notebook. You just may
want itagain." He took the papers, and hefted his case against his hip.
°rH take these back to Roger this evening." The papeIS rustled down
in the case. "I probably won't be seeing you again. 1 really don't know
hoW long the printing will take. I wish 1 could see the whole project
through.' He snapped a last snap. "I'm sure he'll send me a copy when
its done--however your mail system works here. Good-bye." His hand
came forward. "I've really enjoyed the time weve spent together, the
talks we've had. Do say good-bye to your little friend for me?"
Kid shook. "Yes, sir. Um ... thank you very much." The notebook
was on the floor, one corner over Kid's bare foot.
Newboy walked to the steps.
"Good-bye," Kid repeated into the silence.
Newboy nodded, smiled, left.
Kid waited for the disturbing memory to flicker once more. His
heart qUieted. Suddenly he picked up his and N ewboy's coffee cup and
went into the kitchen.
Seconds after he began to rinse them in the sink, he noticed how
fum the water pressure was. He ran his forefinger around the crock
rim. The water hissed on enamel.
Somebody struck a dissonance on the piano.
Curions, Kid turned off the water. The cups clinked on the sideboard. As he crossed the floor, one. of the boards squeaked: he had
wanted to be completely quiet.
At the darker end of the auditorium, someone in work clothes stood
before the brass innards. The orange construction shoes and the coveralls momentarily recalled the woman on the ladder changing the
street signs.
The figure turned and walked to the conch. "'Ey ... ' A heavy. flattened voice, a slight nod and slighter smHe: George Harrison picked
up an :old Times, and lowered himseU to the couch, crossed his legs,
and! opened the tabloid-size paper.
"Hello." Kid'heard faint organ music.
"Y's'pos'd' be i' 'eah?" Harrison looked from behind the paper.
'Ihe natural rhythm of English speech; no, Kid thought, it is impossible.
"You sure you supposed to be in here?' George repeated.
· 362 Dhalgnm
"Reverend Taylor brought me down.· (It would be stupid, he decided, even to try.)
"'Cause if you aint suppose to be in here, she gonna get mad." Harrison smiled, a motded ivory crescent between his lips' uneven pigment.
"Seen you in the bar."
"That's right." Kid grinned. "And you're in those posters all over
town,n
"You seen them?" Harrison put down the paper. "You knOw, them
fellows what make them is a litde--" he joggled his hand-"you know?"
Kid nodded.
"They good though. They good guys.' He shook his head, then
pointed at the ceiling. "She don't want no scorpion around here. You
sure youre supposed to be in bere. Don't matter to me, she said okay."
"I was hungry,' Kid said. "She said I could get something to eat .•
"Oh." Harrison turned on the couch. His green jumpsuit was open
to the waist, over a hanlon shirt with a raveled collar. "You come for
the service?"
"No.n
.. Ain't no scorpion come to the damn service anyway. What you fellows dress up all that shit fad" Harrison laughed, but shook a finger.
cool, itS cool.:II
Kid looked at ,the large, lined knuckles and thought of the cracks in
black earth. "What kind of service is it?"
"I just come because she say I should please come, so, you know, I
come here sometimes." Harrison shook his head. "From]ackson,that's
where-" and something Kid couldn't follow-'see?"
Though he didn't, Kid nodded. Then he became curious and asked,
"What did you say?"
"InJackson. You know whatJackson is?"
"Yeah, sure.:II
But Harrison was laughing again.
He, Kid reflected, is becoming a gad, to see what emerged from his
tone of thought. Kid's iuner eye was alive with visions of June.
But George stood, dropping his paper. White leaves opened and fell,
one on the couch, several on the floor. 'You the one they call the Kid
Yeah?"
Kid was terrified, and felt stupid for nOt knowing why.
"They talk about you. I heard about you. I heard what they said."
The finger shook again. "You the one that don't know who he is. I
heard them."
In Time of Plague 363
"Nobody around here got anything to do except talk,' Kid said. "You
Imowthat? You know what I mean about that?"
The black hand went down against the coverall. The green wrinkled. ·So you don't like it here?"
"Yeah," Kid said. "I like it. .. don't you?"
Harrison nodded, his cheek filled with his tongue. "You ever come
over in the Jackson?" The tongue flicked the lips.
"I've walked dll'ough. "
"You know any black people live over there?"
"No. Well, Paul Fenster ... "
nOh, yeah."
"But I don't know where he lives."
"You come over there and see me sometime, huh?"
"Huh?" Kid was not sure he had caught any of the last words bundled in that voice with a nap longer than velvet.
"I say tyou come pay a visit on me.'"
"Oh. Yeah. Thanks." Kid was bewildered. Searching that, he found
two questions about things that rhymed which flooding embarrassment blocked. So he narrowed his eyes instead.
"Kid-" she called from the stairs behind him. Then, in a completelydifferent voice: "George-hi there, babes!"
Kid turned. "Hey-!»
George called over him, "Hey there-» and then with a narrowing
expression: "Say, this ain't your old man, is it? The guy I been hearing
aU that talk about aver in the bar-well, say! Now the last time I seen
your old lady, you know I tell her to bring you down and pay a visit to
me, you hear?»
Lanya came down the steps; George walked toward them.
"Now see,' Lanya said, "' haven't seen you since the park.'
"1£1 got to invite you twice, I guess I got to invite you twice," George
said, starting up. "Got to go see me the Reverend now, though. One of
you drag the other on down, RaW." George nodded toward Kid·
"Urn . .. thanks,» Kid said, nodded back.
'See you around," George said
«Sure, D said
They passed.
George's response was a falsetto, '000000000,» which broke and became trundling laughter. Laughter rolled beneath the ceiling like
smoke. George mounted into it.
At the bottom of the stairs Lanya said, "Where've you been?" and
364 Dhalgren
blinked four or five times more than he thought she would have, in
silence.
"I ... I couldn't find you this morniBg. I looked for you. I couldn't
find you. At the commune, or down at the bar. What happened? Where
did everybody go?"
Her eyes questioned Her lips moved on one another, did not open.
"You want some coffee?" he asked out of discomfort, turned and
went into the kitchen. "I'll go get you some coffee. It's all ready, inside."
At the urn, he picked up a cup, pulled the lever. "Did you see Tak
too? How'd you know I was here?" Amher bubbles burst at the rim;
black liquid steamed. "Here you-" he turned and was surprised that
she was right behind him.
"Thank you." She took the cup. Steam flushed before her lowered
eyes. "I saw Tak.'; She sipped. "He said you might be here. And that
Mr Newboy was looking for you."
"He just left. He had my book. The galleys, for the poems. The type's
all set."
She Bodded. "ifell me what you've been doing."
"It was a pretty funny day." He poured coffee for himself, deciding
as he did he hlld already had too much. "Really funny. After you went
off, I looked for you. And 1 couldn't fmd you anywhere. I stopped in
the john to wash up. When 1 got down to the camp site, I·couldn't find
you. Andeverybody'd run off." He put his hand on her shoulder; she
smiled faintly. "I got in with some scorpions this afternoon ... this
evening. That was pretty strange. A guy got shot. We were on the bus,
and he was bleeding. And I kept On thinking, what are they going to
do with him? Where are they going to take him? There isn't any doctor around. We even had his arm in a tourniquet. I couldn' ttake it. So
I just got off the bus. And came here. Because I was hungry. I hadn't had
anything to eat all day except a God-damn pint of wine for breakfast."
"You ate here?" She looked by both his shoulders. "That's good."
"What did you do?"
She was wearing a white blouse, dean but unironed, that he had not
seen before. As she walked beneath the bulb, he saw her jeans were
new enough to show the crease. ·You pick up some dothes this afternoon?" He followed her into the bare auditorium.
"Yesterday. I found them in a doset of the place where I'm staying
now."
"You have been busy, huh? You found a house an' am"
"About three days ago.·
In Time of Plague 365
"Jesus," Kid said, "when did you get time to do that? I didn't think
I let you alone long enough ,to go to the danm bathroom, much less
find a house-"
"Kid •.. ' She turned on the word to lean against the sofa arm. In
the hall, shrill echoes returned. "Kid," much more softly, "I haven't
seen you in five days!·
"Huh?" The heel on the floor and the heel in his boot prickled.
Prickling rose up his legs, spread about his thighs. "What do you
mean?:n
"What do you mean what do I mean?" She spoke clumsily, breaking
through three tones ·0£ voice. "Where have you been?" Retreating from
the clumsiness, her voice was left only with hurt. "Why did you go
away? What did you do all this time?"
Little things clawed between his buttocks, mounted rib by rib,
perched on his shoulder to nip at his neck so he had to drop his chin.
Lines of perspiration suddenly cooled. "You're kidding with me, aren't
you? like with the moons?"
She looked puzzled.
"The night when the moons first came out, and !aterwe were talking about them; you pretended that there had jest been one, and that
I had been seeing things. You're fooling with me like that now?"
"No!" She shook her head, stopped it in the middle of a shake. "Oh,
no . . . n
His cheeks felt like pincushions.
"Kid, what happened since the last time you saw me?"
"We woke up, when those sons of bitches were standing around us,
right?"
She nodded.
"Then you went away, and I •.. well, I hung amund for a little
while, and then I went down to the john to wash up. I guess 1 took an
awful long time. I should have hurried ... But there was this guy there,
Pepper, a scorpion." The prickling had left his feet: it felt as though he
were being poured full of cold water. It rose behind his knees. 'Pepper
and me, we went down to the camp site, ,only it had been abandoned.'
"John and Milly didn't move the Commune till the day after I saw
you last; they thought it would be safer."
"Then we went to Teddy:' to look for you. Only it wasn't open yet.
And I had a lot of wine with Bunny-you koow the guy who dances
there. I gave him a message far you."
She nodded. "Yes, he gave it to me ... the day before yesterday!"
366 Dhalgren
"No," he said. "Because I gave it to him this morning." The water
reached.his loins, poured into his.scrotUm; his scrotum shriveled.
"Then 1 went out, and ended up at that department store downtown.
That's where 1 met the other guys, and we broke into the place. There
were people living in there. We got out. But they shot one of the guys.
We just got him out of there, on the God-damn hus that happened to
be coming along'"
"That happened two nights ago, Kidl Soma of the scorpions came
into the bar and wanted to know if anybody knew where they could
get a doctor. Madame Brown went with them, but she came back in
about ten minutes. everybody was talking about it all yesterday."
"He was bleeding and moaning on the floor of the bus'" The water
roared around in Kid's chest, then filled the column of his neck, fountained inside his head. "I got off the bus, and I came-" He choked,
and for a moment thought he would drown. «-came here." The water
reached his eyes (and the work bulb grew knitting needles of light); he
brushed it away, before more of it rolled down his face, no longer cold,
but hot.
He kept rubbing at his eyes with the other: coffee had slopped over.
He raised his cup and sucked the bitter liquid from his skin.
"0, give that herel" She took his cup from him and put them both
down on the sofa arm. "I'm not fooling youl"
His hand, lost with nothing to hold, hung like something torn from
among roots and still clumped with earth.
Lanya took it, pressed the knuckles to her mouth. "I'm not kidding
you .at all. That morning, in the park, when Nightmare woke us up was
five days ago. And I haven't seen you sincel"
At her touch, he found himself ponderously calm, and kept trying
to deterraine if the submarine silence tltat filled him hid anger or relief.
"Look, you said Mr Newboywas here with the galleys. You can't set
type on a whole book overnight, can you?"
·Oh ... "
"When we wereaH talking about you, last night in the bar, he came
looking for you with them then, too."
"Talking about me?" He wanted to pull his hand away, but felt embarrassed.
"About you and the scorpions. They said you saved somebodys life."
"Huh?H
She took his other hand now; the familiar gesture only made him
less comfortable.
In Time of Plague 367
The hurts among her small features and his own made something
ugly between them. He raised his hands and pulled her to him, to
squeeze it away. She came up against him with her arms crossed over
her belly, and here was a hard thing over one breast-her harmonica. She moved her head against his chest. "Oh, for God's sakes," she
whispered.
"I'm not fooling you either I " He didn't sound, he thought, nearly as
desperate as he felt. "I saw you this morning. 1 ... 1 thought 1 saw you
this morning. n
"You've been running around with the scorpions all week. Everybody you're some kind of hero or something."
"What'd you think?" Her hair brushed his moving chin.
"Shit. That's what I thought: 'Shit.' You want to go ofT in that direction. Fine. But 1 don't feel like getting messed up in anything like that.
I really don' I.'
"This afternoon,' he said. "I mean it was by accident 1 found them.
And 1 didn't save anybody's life. ThaI was just ... '
"Look at you," she said, not moving away. "You're dressing like
them; you're hanging out with them. I mean go on: lf that's what you
want, go on. But its not my scene. I canlt go there with you.D
"Yeah, but ... Hey, look. You: you say you've got a house and all.
Where are you staying now?"
"Would you mind," she said softly, "if! didn't tell you?" but opened
her arms and put them around him. "Just for a while?" The harmonica corner cut his chest.
He wondered could she feel the anger inside him, pulsing under her
bands. "I, n he said, IIsaw you this morning. n
She pulled back, all his anger on her face. "Lookl" She made fists at
her hips. "Either you're lying to mefor some kooky reasons I don't even
want to know about or you're really crazy, and in either case 1 shouldn't
have anything to do with you, right? The night before 1 saw you last, you
lost three hours. Now you've lost five days. Maybe you really are crazy. 1
shouldn't have anything to do wilh you I Thats rational, isn't it? 1 haven't
seen you in five days, and, Christ, am 1 angry at youl"
"Then why Ihe fuck were you looking for mel" He turned and
stalked down the haH, a great bubble about to burst inside his ribs.
At the piano, he realized Harrison must have opened the curtains
On the low stage. The backdrop-and there were stands with photographer's floocls--showed a painted moon, some seven feet across, and
indications around it of trees.
368 Dhalgren
He turned at the apron, surprised again to find her behind him.
"Why did you come?"
"Because this is the first time I've known where you were. I didn't
know . ... " She gasped. "I didn't know if you were all right. You didn't
come back. I thought maybe you were angry at me for something. You
used to always come back. And suddenly, for all that time, instead of
you, all I got was what people were saying about you. You and the SCorpions; you and the scorpions." Something spent itself in her eyes. The
lids lowered on the shadowed green. "Look, so far we haven't had one
of those 'I'IMollow-you-anywhere' relationships. 1 still haven't made
up my mind if thafs, where I want to go. And 1 just get a little nervous
when I find myself thinkiog I might. Thafs all."
"A week." Hefelt his face twist. "What the hell did 1 do for ... five
days? When did I .•. ' He reached for her.
Her face crashed against his, hitting his mouth, but she pushed her
tongue against his, alid was holding tight to the back of his neck. He
kept trying to pull her even closer, leaning against the stage.
He loosed one hand to dig between them, till he could pull the harmonica from her blouse pocket. It rattled on the stage behind them.
"You're not going to hm:t anyone," she said once. "Ymrre not going
to hurt me. 1 know that. You're not."
The hysteria with which she made love to him on that dark stage
was firstfurious, then funny (wondering if someone was going to walk
in, and excited by the idea); he lay On his back while she bucked above
him, clutching his shoulders, wondering should he reel this way. But
the sound she was making that he'd thought was crying cleared to
laughter. Her buttocks filled his hands, and he dug between them.
She reared too high, and lost him to the annealiog chill. While she
reached for him, he rolled her to her side. Legs in the clutch of denim,
he crawled down to the sweaty comer of her blouse and pushed his
tongue through her salty hair. She luted a knee to let it fall wide. Mter
she came (he had worked his pants free of one foot) he straddled her,
pushed his penis into her again, lowered Ilis belly to he. belly, his chest
to her chest, his wet face against the crumpled shoulder of her blous.,
and began long fioal strokes, while her arms tightened on his back.
Coming horned his loins (he remembered the spHled coffee) and
left him exhausted and still burning (he remembered how it felt after
masturbating when all you started off with Was a piss-on); exhaustion won. ukes of sweat cooled around his body. She nodded in
the crook of his shoulder, where he knew his arm would numb soon,
In Time of Plague 369
but didn't feel like doiog anything about it. He slid his hand down his
own chest, till his fingers caught in the transverse chain, beaeath angular shapes.
Tirne's voices in agon? Who wants to hear hunchbacks and spastics
haggle? Even if there are no others in concert. We should not he lying
here, cooling, half naked, half asleep. A good reason to do it. I am still
angry at her. I am still angry. Would she have it I choose scorpions all
for negative reasons? Have they been a surround? No: it is better to accept the inevitable with energy. Wen then, if I have not chosen up till
now, now I choose. That is freedom. Having chosen, I am free. Somewhere in my memory is a moon that gives odd light. It is safe hereHe woke: which was suddenly arriving in that space hetween the
boards and the touch of eyelid against eyelid, the weight of his loose
fIst on his pelvis and the boards pressing his backside.
She's gone, he thought, with her harmonica to sit on the couch and
play. He listened to the music from the other end of the hall
But you can't make that discord on a harmonica.
He opened his eyes and rolled to his side (the batteryless projector
clacked onto the floor at the end of the rattling ehaio) and frowned.
The sound was much further away than he'd thought; and was organ
music.
She's gone ... ?
Kid stood to pull his pants around his leg.
The harmonica was not on the backdrop curving down over the
floor.
He pushed his other foot into his pants, sweaty in blotches. He
picked up his vest, his orchid, and walked down the steps at the stage
edge. Booted foot and bare left their alternating prints in the dust.
Also, his notebook was not in front of the couch.
At the room's center, he stopped to swallow something filling his
throat_ The sound with it was almost a sob.
Upstairs the organ played on. And there were voices, mumbliog and
growing and diminishing. It was silly to think she was upstairs. He put
the orchid in his belt and shrugged up his vest as he climbed the steps.
A dozen black men and women milled from the chapel into the
vestibule, from the vestibule into the street. Two women walking together glanced at him curiously. A man in a narrow-brimmed hat
smiled at him and vanished. Others looked less friendly. The voices
turned and blurred like smoke, Or prickled with laughter that melted
with the next dozen ambliog by the closed office.
370 Dhalgren
"Lovely service, don't you think .• ."
"She ain't gonna talk aboutall that stuff next time too, is she, 'cause
I . .. "
"Didn't you think it was a lovely service ..• "
He stepped among them to leave. Somebody kicked his bare heel
twice, but he racked it up to accident and didn't look. Outside, the
evening was purple grey; smoke blunted the facades across the street.
Only a few white people passed mrough the trapezoid of light across
the sidewalk. One, a woman with a flowered scarf tied around her head,
followed an older man, talking earnestly with a black companion; and
a heavy guy; blond, in a shirt with no collar that looked as if it were
made of army blanket planted Iuinself before the door, while brown
and darker faces passed around him. Now a gaunt girl, with freckles
on her tan cheeks and brick-red hair, reached him. The two whispered
together, walked into the darkness.
Kid waited by the door, watching the worshippers, listening to the
tape. People strolled away. Some voices lingered, till the owners followed their shadows into the night. The dwindling crowd made him
feel lost. Maybe he should duck back in to tell Reverend Taylor hI! was
leaving.
Studs bright in scuffed leather, shadows slipping across his shaggy;
blond stomach, cap pushed back off the yellow brush, Tak Loufer
stepped out, looked at Kid with a single highlight in {lne shadowed eye,
and said, "He}'> you still around here? 1 sent two people over looking
for you. But 1 thought you'd be gone by now."
5
"What are you here fod"
Tak held up a paper roll. "Completing my poster collection. You
been keeping yourself away from us awhile? We were worried about
you."
"Shit!" fen from the residue of anger. "You wanted to suck on my
dick some, maybe? Come On. It's all slicked up for you with pussy juice.
You like that, right?"
"Nigger pussy?"
"Huh?"
"Were you screwing a colored girl? And with the clap?"
"What are you talking about?"
"If it wasn' t black meat and a little runnYi I'm not interested. Since
In Time of Plague 371
I had you last ,time, bo}'> I've gone on to levels of perversion you haven't
""en thought about. What's the matter With you, anyway? You out of
it again? Why don't you come up and tell me about it while I get
drunk."
"Aw, shit ... ' Not wanting to, Kid put his hands in his pocket and
his head down in the nights chalky stench; they walked together to the
curb.
"Your girl friend find you?"
Kid grunted.
"Did you have a fight or something? The last few times 1 spoke to
her, I got the impression she was sort of getting ready for one."
"Maybe we did." Kid said. "1 don't koow."
"Ahl one of thQse?1J
'She said you saw me get off a bus?"
"Yeah. Earlier this evening. 1 was down at the corner. I was going to
call you, but you turned first, down toward here."
"Oh.:n
A light moved in a window.
. Fire, Kid thought. The flickering made him uneasy. He tried to imagme ,the whole block, the church and the buildings around it, ·conflagrated.
"I think somebody lives there," Tak said. "It's just candles." They
Stepped off the curb.
. "Where are we?" Kid asked when they stepped up again. "I mean,
Tak ..• what is this place? What happened here? How did it get like
this?D
"A good question," Tak answered over tapping boot heels. "A very
good One. For a while, I thought it was international spies-I mean,
maybe the whole city here was JUSt an experiment, a sort of test-Out
plan to destroy the entire country. Maybe the world.'
"You think its something like that?" "N? But it's comforting to consider all this the result of somelhing
organIZed. On the other hand, it could just be another ecolOgical catastrophe. Maybe somebody filled in our swamp by mistake."
"Whatswamp?U
"By every big city theres always some sort of large swamp nearby;
usually of about the same area. It keeps the smog down, supplies most
of the oxygen, and half a other absolutely essential things. New
York has the Jersey Flats, San Francisco, the whole muddled-out Oakland edge of ,the bay. You fill the swamp in, the smog goes up, the
372 Dhalgren
sewage problem gets out of hand, and the city becomes unlivable.
No way to avoid it. I think it's fair to say most people would find this
unlivable."
Kid sniffed. "We sure got enough smog." The blades at his belt tickled the hair on his inner forearm. "Where'sour swamp?"
"Obviously you've never taken the ride out past Holland Lake."
Kid shrugged in his bindings. "That's true." The chain that wrapped
him had worked down so that it tugged across the back of his left hip
at every other step. He reached under his vest and moved it with his
thumb. "Do you think what happened to Bellona?" Someday I'll
die, turned irrelevandy through his mind: Death and artichokes, Heaviness filled his ribs; he rubbed his chest for the reassuring systolic and
diastolic thumps. Not that I really think it might stop, he tbought: only
that it hasn't just yet. Sometimes (he thought), I wish 1 couldn't feel it.
(Someday. it will stop.)
"Actually," Tak was saying, "I suspect the whole thing is science
fiction."
"Huh? You mean a time-warp I or a paranel universe?"
"No, just ... well, science fiction. Only real. It follows aU the Conventions."
·Spaceships, ray-guns, going faster than light? I used to read the
stuff, but 1 haven't seen anything like that around here."
"Bet you don't read the new; good stuff. Let's see: the Three Conventions of science fiction-" Tak wiped his forehead with his leather
sleeve. (Kid thought, inanely: He's polishing his brain.) "First: A single man can change the course of a whole world: Look at Calkins, look
at George-look at you! Second: The only measure of intelligence or
genius is its linear and practical application: In a landscape like this,
what other kind do we even allow to visit? Three: The Universe is an
essentially hospitable place, full of earth-type planets where you can
crash-land your spaceship and survive long enough to have an adventur'" Here in Bellona-"
"Maybe why I don't read more of the stuff tban 1 do," Kid said.
He had had his fill of criticism with N ewboy; the noise was no longer
comforting. "Wasn't there a street lamp working on this block?"
Tak bulled out the end of his sentence: "-in Bellona you can have
anything you want, as long as you can carry it by yourself, or get your
friends to." .
funny. not that many people have that much. n
• A comment on the paucity of our imaginations-none at aU on the
In Time of Plague 373
wonders here for the taking. No-it's a comment on the limits ·of the
particular mind the city encourages. Who wants to be as lonely as the
acquisition of all those objects would make them? Most people here
have spent most of their time someplace else. You learn something
from that."
"You've got more than practically anybody else 1 know,· Kid said.
"Then you know very rew people. n
"Except Mr Calkins." Kid thought about the Richards. "And I don't
know him." But Takhad seen Mr Newboy earlier. Thk wonld ·know his
book was set.
"There's a whole range between," Tak said. "You've limited your acquaintances to the people who don't want very much. Essentially a
religiOUS choice, I suppose. All things considered, I'd say it was a wise
one. There are a thousand people-perhaps-in this city."
"I did meet one family who-"
"There are many others. And most of them, as Paul Fenster keeps
reminding us, are black."
"George Harrison just told me I should come over and visit him in
Jackson."
'ak beat the darkness with his poster. "There! The whole thing.
Paul will tell you, but George will show you, if you give him half a
chance." Now Loufer Sighed. "I'm afraid I'm still pretty much a verbal
type. I'd just as soon be told."
"And look at posters."
"And read books. Preferably science fiction. But like I say. Bellona
is terribly hospitable. You can hav.: your fantasy and ... well, besides
eating it too, you can also feel just a bit less like you're depriving anyQne else of theirs. Home again. n
Kid looked around with blunt thumbs of darkness on his eyes. "We
are? Tak, didnt there used to be a street light working at the end of your
block?"
'Went out a few days ago. This way. Watch out for the steps. There's
all sorts of junk around."
Some of it rolled beneath Kid's flexible leather sole. Soft darkness
turned hard. The echo from the sound of breath and footsteps changed
timbre.
They went through the hall, went downstairs, went up.
"First time you were up here,» Tak laughed, "I made you park your
weapon at the door. Boy. 1 don't know how some people put up with
me,l!
374 Dhalgren
The roof door opened on distant, flesh-colored light.
Where the streets had been hopelessly black, the roof was dusted
with nightlight.
Uke two giant hieroglyphs, over-printed and ,out of register, the
bridge's suspension cables rose to twin cusps, then dropped in smoke.
No more than on. row of buildings away, night water took up the glitter of both street lamps and redder quavering fires. "Hey, it's so close . .. "
Before him, above the city, shapes unfurled out over the water. He
could not see the far shore. It could even have been a sea he gazed at,
save for the bridge ... Above, sky-bits seemed to clear, their clarity,
however, unconfirmed by stars.
"How come it's so close?" He turned from the wall, as the light came
on in the shack.
Tak had already gone inside.
Kid looked at the warehouses, at the waters between. Joy, sudden
and insistent, twisted the muscles of his mouth toward laughter. But
he held the sound in with tiny pantings. What swelled inside was made
of light. It burst-he blinked and the backs of his lids were blindingand left a great wave of trust washing inside. Not that 1 trust that trust
for a moment, he thought, grinning. But it was there, and pleasant. He
went into the shack. "It's ... it's so clear tonight.'
A tiny solitaire of sadness gleamed in the velvet folds oIgood feeling.
"Ulst time I was up here, Lanya was with me."
Tak just grunted and turned from his desk. "Have some brandy."
But be smiled.
Kid took the. glass and sat on the hard bed. Now Tak unrolled the
poster:
George Harrison as the moon.
"You got all three now.' Kid sipped, with hunched shoulders.
George in cycle drag was still above the door.
George in the forest had replaced the Germanic youth.
Tak roUed his chair to the wall and climbed onto the green cushion.
Corner by corner he tugged loose "Spanish boy on the rocks." "Hand
me the staple gun?"
The first poster swayed to the floor.
Ch-klack, ch-klack, ch-klack, ch-klack, the new moon replaced it.
Kid sat down again and regarded the three aspects ,of George over
the tim of his glass while Tak got down from the chair. "I ... " Kid's
voice sounded hollow and made something deep in his ear tickle so
that he grinned. "You know, I lost five days?" He slid his fmgers around
the glass till the nubs butted.
In Time of Plague 375
"Where-" Tak put down the stapler, took up the bottle and leaned
back against the desk, hands locked on the green neck; the base put a
crease in his stomach-'or would you be telling me if you knew-did
you lose them?"
don't know.»
"You laok pleased enough about it.·
Kid grunted. "A day now. It ,takes about as long as an hour used to
when 1 was thineen or fourteen .•
«And a year takes about as long as a month. Oh yes, I'm familiar
with the pheoomeoon."
"Most of the time in my life is spent lying around getting ready to
fall asleep."
"That one has been mentioned to me before, but I'm not conscious
ofit myself."
"Maybe, somehow, for the last few days, I've just missed out on the
sleeping part. There's hardly any change in light around here from
morning to eveuing anyway."
"You mean the last five days are the Ones you can't remember?"
"Yeah, what have r been up to, anyway? Ulnya ... said everybody
was talking about it.'
"Not everybody. But enough, I suppose."
"What were they saying?"
"If you lost those days, I can see why you'd be interested."
"I'd just like to' know what I've been doing."
Brandy splashed inside the bottle to Tak's laughter. "Maybe you've
traded the last five days for your name. Quick, tell me: Who are you?"
"No." Kid hunched his sboulders more. The feeling that he was
being played with wobbled like an unsteady ball on some slanted rim,
rolled into the velvet pouch. "r don't know that either."
"Oh." 'ak drank from the bottle,..set it back on his belly. "Well, I
thought it was worth a try. I suspect it isn't something to be harped
on." The brandy swayed. "What have you been doing for the last week?
!.etmesee."
"r know I waS with the scorpions-l met this guy named Pepper.
And he turned me on to this department store they were going to try
and ... rip off, I guess."
"So far I'm with you. There was supposed to have been some shooting there? You were supposed to have saved one guy hy fighting off
somebody with a gun, hare-'handed. You were supposed to have busted
a milror over the head of another guy who acted up with you-"
·Under his chin."
376 Dhalgren
"That's it. Copperhead told me about that himself. And then when
another cat named Siam got sbot-"
"'Was that his name?"
. "-when Siam got shot, you pulled him off the street and got him
into the bus.1'I
"And you saw me get out of this bus earlier this evening."
'Copperhead told me about it a couple of days back."
"Only it happened to me this afternoon, God damn it!" Ashamed,
he blinked at his hands. "That's all they said happened? I mean there
wasn't anything else?"
'Sounds to me like enough."
"What happened to Siam?"
Tak shrugged. Brandy splashed. "Somebody went to see about him,
I remember, from the bar."
"Madame Brown?"
"1 think that's who it was. But I haven't heard anything else. For
somebody who doesn't remember where he's been, you seem to know
as much about it as I do." Tak reached over, dragged the chair to the
desk, and sat. He started to put the bottle on the desk, but halted to
take a fInal drink. "You do remember all the things t just told you about
actually happening?"
Kid nodded at his lap. "I've just lost the lime, then. I mean, I've lost
days befoTe-thought it was Thursday when it was Friday."
"All we thought, really, was that you'd deserted us to become a fullfledged scorpion. 1t was cool with me. You sure look like what
happened. You got your lights and everything."
Kid focused on the lensed ban hanging against his stomach. "It
doesn't work. 1t needs a new battery."
"Just a seconci" Tak opened a desk drawer. "Here you go." He
tossed. •
Kid caught it in both hands: bunched lightning on red and blue.
UIura yourself on I)
"Thanks." Wanting to talk longer, he put the battery in his pocket,
noting the cloth was frayed enough at the boltom seam to feel flesh
through it with his fingers. "Tak, you really think you got the city figuredout?1'I
"Me?!!.
"You were telling me how it follows those conventions-"
Tak laughed, and wiped his mouth with his wrist. "No, not me. I
don't understand anythiBg about it. I'm a God-damn ,engineer. I take a
In Time of Plague 377
plug; I put it in one socket; and it works. I put it in another one; and
it doesn't. 1 go into an office building and one elevator works, and only
the lights on the top floor. That's impossible, by anything I know about.
t go down a street: buildings are burning. I go down the same street the
next day. They're still burning. Tw(} weeks later, I go down the same
street and nothing looks like its been burned at all. Maybe time is just
running backward here. Or sideways. But thats impossible too. I make
my forage trips out ,to the warehouses, or some of the stores, and sometimes I can get in, and sometimes I can' t, and! sometimes I have trouble.
and sometimes I don't; and sometimes I take my shopping bag into a
store and dear off a shelf of canned goods, and come back to that same
5tore again a week later-I mean I think it:s the same damn store-and
that shelf is just as full as the first time I saw it. To my mind, thats also
impossible. "
"Sometimes the morning light starts over here," Kid said. "Sometimes it starts over there."
"Who told you about tha!?"
'You dici First day 1 got here."
"Oh.· Tak lifted the bottle. "Oh, yeah. right. You got a pretty
good memory for some things."
"I remember lots of things: Some of it, so sharp it ... hurts sometimes. All this fog, all this smoke-sometimes it'll be sharper and clearer than what you see in front of you. And the rest ofit-" he looked
up again and noticed Loufer's discomfort_ "just isn't there." Kid
laughed. which made Loufer chew harder on what was in the back of
his mouth. "Why do you stay in Bellona, Tak?"
"I gather your friend Ernest Newboy is leaVing tomOrrow: I don't
know: Why do you?"
Itl donlt know.."
"I mean, considering what you've been going through, maybe Bellona isn't the best place for you." Tak leaned forward, stretching the
bottle out.
"Oh,' Kid said. "Here." He held out his glass; Tak refilled it.
"You were talking about the first night I met you. Remember back
then, I ask.d you why you'd COme here, and you said you had a purpose for coming?"
"Thats right."
"Tell me what it is.·
And once, in South Dakota, he had dropped a quarter into a pOOl
that turned out to be much deeper than he'd thought. He had watched
3.78 Dhalgren
Ihe coin spin and dull and vanish beyond Ihe edging of leaves. Now a
thought vanished from his mind, and the memory of the lost quarter
was all he had to describe Ihe vanishing. "1 ... 1 don't know'" Kid
laughed and pondered aU the other Ihings he mighl do; laughing
seemed best. ") don't ..• remember! Yeah, 1 know 1 had a reason for
coming here. But I'll be God damned if! can leU you what it was!" He
leaned back, then forward, caught the brandy thaI was about to spill
his glass in his mouth,and gulped it. "I really can'l. It must have
been ... " He looked at the ceiling, suspending his breath for recollection. "I. can't remember . .. . remember that, either!ll
Tak was smiling.
"You know; I had il wilh me; I mean, Ihe reason." Kid swung out
his hands. "I Was carrying it around, in the back of my head, you
know? Like on a back shelf? And then 1 jusl reached for iI, to take it
down, only 1 goess 1 knocked it over. 1 saw it fall off and disappear.
I'm hunting around in my mind, but 1 can't ... find it." He slopped
laughing long enough to feellhe annoyance that had begon to grow.
"Bellona's not a bad place for me." Staled reasonably and smilingly, it
was sli\l. annoyance. "I mean, 1 gal a girl friend; I've met an sorts of
people, some pretly nice-"
"Some not so nice?D
"Well, you learn. And 1 got a book. Brass Orchids, you know; my
poems; it's all finished! They gal galleys on it."
Tak still smiled, nodding.
"And you say people are talking aboul me like I'd done somelhing
great. Leave? You think I'm not going to go mad in some other city?
There 1 might not have all these extras." Kid put the glass down,
punched Ihe air, and leaned back on Ihe wall. "I ... like il here? No.1
want 10 see some sun. Sometimes 1 want to reach up and peel off all
that sky. It looks like the cardboard they make egg crales out of, you
know? Just peel it, in great, flapping slrips. I wonder where Lanya
wenl." He frowned. "You know; maybe 1 don'l have a girl friend any
more. And the book is finished with; 1 mean iI's all written and in type;
and 1 dorrt want to do any more." He turned his fIst on his forefinger.
"And even if thoysay I'm a hero, ) didn't really do anything." He looked
al the poslers: just pictures, yet thinking thaI opened bOlh Iheir moc&-
ing and Iheir harrowing resonances; he looked away. "Somelhing isn' I
... fmished here. No." The denial made him smile. "It's me. At leasl
parI has to do with me. Or maybe George. Or June ... It would almost
looh like everything was finished, wouldn't it? And maybe it's time to
In Time of Plague 379
leave? But that's what lets me know I shouldn't. Becausethere're no
distractions. I can look in and see. There's so much 1 don't know." The
laughter filled his mouth, but when he leI it OUI, it was only breath
from a smile. "Hey, you want to blow me? I mean ... if you'd like to,
I'd like it."
Tak frowned, put his head to the side. But before he spoke, his own
rough laugh exploded: "You are a nervy bastard!"
"1 don't mean just suck my dick. I'd make love with you. I've done
it before, with goys. n
"I never doubted it a minute." Tak laughed again .• And no, 1 don't
want to suck your dick, pussy or no. Where do you come off with that
idea?"
But something inside had released. Kid yawned hugely and explained, with the end of it muddling his words, "Lanya said I should
go to bed with you again; she thought you'd like it.·
"Did she, now?D
"But I said you were only interested in first tastes." Looking at
Loufer, he suddenly realized behind the blond jocularity there was em·
barrassment, so looked at his lap again. "I goess 1 was .. ." right was
mauled by another yawn.
"Oh, look. Why don't you just lie down and go to sleep. What 1 want
to do is drink about three mOte shots of brandy and read a God·damn
book or something. n
"Sure.' Kid lay belly down on the pallet, and jiggled around so the
chains and prisms and projector did not bite his chesl.
Tak shook his head, turned around in his chair, and stretched for
the second shelf over the desk. A book fell. Tak Sighed.
Kid grinned and moved his mouth down into the crookof his arm.
Tak drank some more brandy, folded his arms on the desk and
began to read.
Kid looked for the sadness again, but it was now neatly invisible
among dark folds. Hasn't turned a page for ten minutes, was his last
amused thought before he closed his eyes and-
"Hey.n
Kid, lying on his back, grunted, "Huh?"
Tak scratched his naked shoulder and looked perturbed. Kid
thought: Now hes going to-?
"I'm afraid 1 gotta kick you out.·
"Oh ... " Kid sqUinted and stretched, in mulled and mechanical
protest. ·Yeah, sure. n Behind the bamboo curtains were streaks oflight.
380 Dhalgren
"} mean a friend of mine came overt" Tak ,explainedl "and we'd sort
oftike ... It
"Oh, yeah ... " Kid closed his eyes tight as he could, opened them,
and sat up while the chains rattled down his chest, and blinked:
Black, perhaps fifteen, in jeans, sneakers and a dirty white shirt, the
boy stood by the door, blinking on balls of red glass.
Kid's back snarled with chills; he made himself smile. From some
other time carne the prepared thought: Such distortion tells me nothing
of him, and is only terrifying because so much is unknown of myself.
And the autonomic nerves, habituated to terror, nearly made hirnscream.
He kept smiling, nodded, got groggily to his feel. "Oh, sure," he said.
"Yeah, I'll be on my way. Thanks for letting me crash."
Passing through the doorway, he had to close his eyes, again, tight
as possible, then look, again, hopeful that the crimson would vanish
for brown and white. They will think I'm still half asleep! he hoped,
hoped desperately, J.ris boot scraping the roof's tar -paper. Morning was
the color of dirty toweling. He left it for the dark stair. Shaking his
head, he tried not to be afraid, so thought! Ousted for someone younger
and prettier, wouldn't you knOw. Well-beneath the lids the eyes were
glass and red! He reached a landing, swung round it, and remembered
the nervous woman with skirts always far too long for the season, who
had been his math instructor his first term at Columbia: • A true
proposition," she had explained, rubbing chalky fingertips hard on
one another, "implies only other true proposiHons. A false one can
iroply, well, anything-true, false, it doesn't matter. Anything at all.
Anything •.. " As if the absurd gave her comfort, her perpetual tone
of hysteria had softened momentarily. She left before the term's COIllr
pleHon. He hadn't, damn it!
Nine flights down he walked the warm hall Twelve steps up? Thirteen he counted this tiroe, stubbing his toe on the top one.
Kid came out on the dawn-dim porch hnng with hooks and coiled
with smoke. He jumped from the platform, still groggy, still blinking,
still filled with the terror which there was no other way to deal with
save laughter. After all, he thought, ambling toward the corner, if this
burning can go on forever, ifbesidesthe moon there really is a George,
if Tak kicks me out for a glass-eyed spa.de, if days Can disappear like
pocketed dollars, then there is no telling. Or only the telling, but no
reasoning. He hooked his thumbs in his pockets where the material
was already fraying, and turned the corner.
Berweenthe warehouses, clearing and fading in moving smoke, the
In Time of Plague 381
bridge rose and swung ant into oblivion. Among the consorted fragments of his curiosity, the thought remained: I should have at least
made him give me a cup of coffee before I went. He cleared his sticky
throat, and turned, expecting the suspension cables any moment to
fade forever, while he (forever?) wandered the smelly waterfront that
somehow never actually opened on water.
This wide avenue had to lead onto the bridge.
Kid followed it for two blocks around a dark official building. Then,
beyond a twist of figure-eights and cloverleaves, the road rolled out between the suspensoTS, over the river.
He could only see as far as the start of the second span. The mist,
among folds and tendrils, condensed the liroits of vision. Foggy dawns
should be chill and damp. This one was grit dry, tickled the back of his
arms and the skiu beneath his neck with something only a breath off
body temperature. He walked up the edge of the road, thinking: There
are no cars, I could run down the middle. Suddenly he laughed loudly
(swallowing phlegm caught there in the night) and ran forward, wav"
iug his arms, yelling.
The city absorbed the sound, returned no echoes.
After thirty yards he was tired, so he trudged and panted in the
thick, dry air. Maybe all these roads just go on, he theorized, and the
bridge keeps hanging there. Hell, I've only been going ten minutes. He
walked beneath several overpasses. He started to run again, cOming
around a curve to the bridge'S aewal entrance.
The mads' lines between the cables began a dozen perspective Vs,
their single vertex lopped by fog. Slowly, wonderingly; he started across
toward the invisible shore. Once he went to the rail and looked over
through the smoke to the water. He looked up through girders and cables past the walkway toward the stanchion tower. What am I doing
here? he thought, and looked again into the fog.
The car was back among the underpasses half a minute while its
motor got louder. Maroon, blunt, and twenty years old, it swung out
onto the gridded macadam; as it growled by; a man in the back seat
turned, smiled, waved.
"Hey!' Kid called, and wa:ved after him.
The car did not slow. But the man gestured again through the back
windshield.
"Mr Newboy!' Kid took six running steps and shouted: "Good-bye!
Good-bye, Mr Newboy!"
'rhe car diminished between ,the grills of cable, hit the smoke, and
382 Dhalgren
sank like a weight an loose cotton. A moment later-too soon, from
his own recollection of the bridge crossed by foot-the sound of Ihe
motor ceased.
What was that sound? Kid hlid thought it was some wind storm very
far away. But it was the air rushing io the cavern of his mouth. Goode
bye, Mr Ernest Newboy, and added with the same good will, you're a tin
Hindenburg, a gassy Nautilus, a coward to the marrow of each metatarsal.
Though it would embarrass you to Hollywood and Hell, I hope: we meet
again. I like you, you insincere old faggot; underneath it all, you probably
like me. Kid turned and looked at the shrouded city, like something
crusty under smoke, its streets stuck blhld in it, its colors pearled and
pasteledi so much distance was implied in the limited Sight.
I could leave this vague, vague city ...
But, holding all his humor in, he turned back toward the underpass. Now and again his face struck into the grotesque. Where is this
city's center? he wQndered, and walked, left leg a little stiff, while
buildings rose, again, to receive him.
Free of name and purpose, whlit do I gaio? I hlive logic and laughter, but can trust neither my eyes nor my hands. The tenebrous city,
city without time, the generous, saprophytic city: it is momiogand I
miss the clear night. Reality? The only moment I ever came close to it
was when, in the moonless New Mexican desert, llooked up at the
prickling stars on that hallowed, hollowed dark. Day? It is beautiful
there, true, fIxed io the layered landscape, red, brass, and blue, but it
is distorted as distance itself, the real all masked by pale diffraction.
Buildiogs, bony and cluttered with ornament, hulled with stone at
their different heights: window, lintel, cornice, and sill patterned the
do:en planes. Billows brushed down them, sweeping at dusts they were
too insubstantial to move, settled to the pavement and erupted in slow
explosions he could see two blocks ahead-but, when he reached, had
disappeared.
I am lonely, he ,thought, and the rest is bearable. And wondered why
loneliness in him was almost always a sexual feeling. He stepped off
the sidewalk and kept along the loose lioe of old cats-nothing parked
On this block later than 196B-thinking: What makes it terrible is that
in this timeless city, in this spaceless preserve where any slippage can
occur, these closing walls, laced with fire-escapes, gates, and creneNations, are too uofixed to hold it in, so thlit, from me as a moving node,
it seems to spread, by flood and seepage, over ,the whole uneasy scape.
He hlid a momentary image of all these walls on pivots controlled by
In Time of Plague 383
subterranean machines, so that, after he had passed, ,they might suddenly swing to face another direction, parting at this corner, joiniog at
that one, like a great maze-forever adjustable, therefore unlearnableWhen the heavy man ran iota' lhe street, Kid first recognized the
green-drab, wool shirt with no collar. Lumbering from the alley sidewalk, he saW Kid, headed for him. The man hlid been one of the white
men at the church last night.
The fleshy face, red and sweat-flecked, shook above pumping fists.
The top of the head was blotchy under a haze of yellow; on the forehead the hair layout like scrap brass.
Suddenly Kid started to move backward. "Hey, watch it-"
"You-!" The man lunged. His fingers caught among, and tugged
at, Kids chains. "You are the one who ... " At the Mexican accent Kid
rifled his wounded memory. "When I was ... you didn't. .. no? You,
please ... don't ... " the man panted through wet lips. His eyes were
bloodshot coral. "Oh, please, don't you ... you were in there, yes? I
... I mean you fool around like that, they gonna ... " His mouth compressed; he looked across the street, looked back. "You ... Oh, the
Kid!" and yanked his hand from tangled links while Kid thought: No,
he didn't say 'the Kid,' he maybe said 'the kid,' or even 'they did.' The
man was shakiog his head: "No, you gonna ... Hey, don't do that ... "
"Look," Kid said, trying to take his arm. "You need some help?
Here, let me.......-"
The man jerked away, nearly fell, began to run.
Kid took two steps after him, stopped.
The blond Mexican tripped on the far sidewalk, pushed up from his
knee, and made it into the alley.
Circling Kid's miod was the Mexican voice in the hall at the
Richards'; various mentions by Thirteen; amphetamioe-psychosis? And
then the thought, clear and overridiog:
He was ... crazy!
Somethiog cascaded, tickliog like a line of insects, across his stomaro. For a moment he mistook it for a chill·of recognition; iodeed, real
chills ignited a moment after.
But the optic chain had parted, probably under the man's tuggiog,
and fallen down over his belt.
Kid picked up the loose end, found the other hanging across his
chest-it had parted between lens and prism-and pulled the thin
brass together. On one end still hung a tiny, twisted link. With great,
stubby fmgers, nearly numb inside theiT callous, he tried to get it
384 Dhalgren
closed. He stood in the street, pinching, twisting, sometimes holding
his breath, sometimes letting it all out suddenly with a mumbled
"Shit ... ' or "Fuck ...• His armpits slipped with the sweat of concentration. His heels, one on leather, one on pavement, stung .. t different heats, His chin stayed tucked into his neck: he sqUinted in the
dawn light, turning once so that his own, edgeless shadow slid from
his fumbling nubs. It took practically ten minutes to fIX.
And you could still tell which link had parted.
When he was fmished, he. was very depressed.
Creatures of Light and Darkness
When he had walked for several minutes, turned several comers, and
the several tensions in his neck and back had ceased (he could think
words noW without striking up hysterical images On the screens of all
five senses), he pissed in the middle of the street, hoping someone
might pass, and, with his fly half open and his fingers under his belt,
walked again and asked himself: Now just what is the problem with
seeing an occasional red eyeball, hey? It is: If I'm hallUCinating that,
how do I tell if anything else is real? Maybe half the people I see aren't
there-Uke that guy who just ran up? Whats he doing in my world?
Some fragment of Mexico, recreated out of smoke and fatigue? How
do I know there isn't a chasm in front of me I've hallucinated into
plain concrete? (The entrance to the bridge ... when 1 first came off
it, was all broken and piled. , , with concrete ... 1) Put the whole
thing up to dreaming? When 1 was seventeen or eighteen 1 stopped
that. Fi'l'e days!
1 am mad again, he thought. Tears brimmed. He swallowed in a
tightened throat. I don't want to be. I'm tired, I'm tired and horny, I'm
so tired I can't make sense out of any of it and my mind won't work
right half the time 1 try: I'm thirsty. My head's all filled with kapok CQffee wouldn't clear. Still, 1 wish I had some. Where am I going, what am
385
384 DhaIgren
closed. He stood in the street, pinching, twisting, sometimes holding
his breath, sometimes letting it all out suddenly with a mumbled
"Shit •.. " or "Fuck ... ' His armpits slipped with the sweat of concenlIation. His heels, one on leather, one on pavement, stung at different heats. His chin stayed tucked into his neck: he sqUinted in the
dawn light, turning once so that his own, edgeless shadow slid from
his fumbling nubs. It took practically ten minutes to fIx.
And you could stin tell which link had parted.
When he was fInished, he was very depressed.
Creatures of Light and Darkness
When he had walked for several minutes, turned several corners, and
the several tensions in his neck and back had ceased (he could think
woros noW without striking up hysterical images On the screens of all
five senses), he pissed in the middle of the street, hoping someone
might pass, and, with his fly half open and his fingers under his belt,
walked again and asked himself: Now just what is the problem with
seeing an occasional red eyeball, hey? It is: If I'm hallUcinating that,
how do I tell if anything else is real? Maybe half the people I see aren't
there-like that guy who just ran up? What:S he doing in my world?
Some fragment of Mexico, recreated out of smoke and fatigue? How
do I know there isn't a chasm in front of me I've hallucinated into
plain concrete? (The entrance to the bridge ... when I first came off
it, was all broken and piled ... with concrete ... ?) Put the whole
thing up to dreaming? When I was seventeen or eighteen I stopped
that. Five daysl
I am mad again, he thought. 'rears brimmed. He swallowed in a
tightened throat. I don't want to be. I'm lired, I'm tired and horny, I'm
sO tiFed I can't make sense out of any of it and my mind won't work
right half the time I try. I'm thirsty. My head's all filled with kapok coffee wouldn't clear. Still, I wish I had some. Where am I going, what am
385
386 Dhalgren
I doing, stumbling in this smoking graveyard? It's not the pain; only
that the pain keeps going oil.
He tried to let all bis muscles go and stepped aimlessly from sidewalk to gutter, his mouth dryer and dryer and dryer. Well, he thought,
if it hurts, it hurts. It's only pain. All right (he looked at blurred house
tops above the trolley wires), I've chosen, I'm here.
To come upon the monastery? Yes, now, wherever it was, what ever.
Walls and white buildings? Syllables to mumble away the meaning?
He had passed nothiog that could possibly have been one. The streets
were strewn with refuse, months old, dried, and odorless: feces gone
pale and crumbly, ossified fruit rind, old papers, once wet and now
crinkly dry.
He prodded the folds of his consciousness for sadness: the crystal
had deliquesced to chalky powder.
... she look like? he thought, and was too tired to panic. Her name,
what was that?
umya: and he saw her short hair, her green eyes, and she was not
there.
One of the street signs was marred with fllth and scratchings; the
other was an empty frame. He turned into the alley because of the
beats; for seconds he could not figure what had happened-a row of
tree trunks on the narrow sidewalk, each in a metal fence, had burned
to charred spikes. Wonderingly, Kid started down the street, not wide
enough {or two cars.
Denny sat on the fender ·o{ "lopsided auto, a-straddle the smashed
headlight, drumming two fingers on the bent rim. Kid walked toward
him, wondering when to speak ...
"Hey, how're you!" Denny's surprise became delight. "What you
doin' here?" he banged with all his knuckles once and stopped. "What
you doin' huh?"
"Just laking a walk. Trying to get my cock sucked. Or somethiog.
Only nobody's out. "
"Huh?" Denny looked puzzled, and then-to Kidi; surprise---embarrassed. He flipped one finger three limes on the chrome, then
looked up again with his lips tight. "The downtown end of the park
has got queers all over it, all day and all night. You know the part with
the paths?"
14No.lI
"Well it does.· Denny flipped his finger once more. "If you been
walking around all night, you couldn't've been lookiog very hard,"
"I was at tbis guy's house," Kid explained. "I thought he was gonna
Creatures of Light and Darkness 387
do me, but somebody else came over and he kicked me out. What are
you doiog out this hour of the morniog?"
Denny nodded toward one of the unpainted buildings. "I'm staying
in there now." Behiod dirty window glass, the brass lion leered, pinioned on his brass stalk. The shade was gone. The socket held a broken
bulb neck.
On the other side of the street, a white curtain moved in a window
almost as dirty. Two black faces pressed together, looked till Kid stared
directly. The curtain dropped.
"You want to get your cock sucked? Come on." Denny, with three
fingers tucked under the rim, was looking straight down. "I'll blow you."
"Huh?tI
When Denny neither moved nor said anything else, Kid started to
laugh. "Hey ... " He stepped on the sidewalk, hit his thighs io imitation
of Denny's drummiog, then stepped back into the street. "Are you
being funny ... l'
Denny looked up. "No."
"Now suppose I took you up on that ... " Kid said, trying to make
it a joke; it wasn't. So he said: "You want to ..• ?" Things that made
the obscure obvious by overturniog overturned.
"Yeah." Denny scratched his chest among rattlingchaios. "Go on,
take it out. Right here, motherfucker." He shook his head. "I'll do you
right here. You want me to show you I mean it? Right here?"
Kid glanced at the window curtain. "Sure, but those spades, they're
staring out the damned window.·
Denny let out his held breath. "I just told you; you thiok I give a
fuck if they know?"
What he'd begun as banter was suddenly uncomfortable, because
though all the aclions were predictable, the feelings were not. "Hey, you
know maybe you just better let the whole thing ... "
Denny leaned his head and glanced to the side with a concentrated
expression'--the look, Kid thought, of someone in a game of go trying
to decide if a long-contemplated move, now made, was, after all, right.
"We'd have to fmd someplace," Kid said. "A doorway, or inside or
something. I don't want to do it right here.· Fifteen3 Kid thought. He's
out of bis head; this kid is a fucking nut.
Denny got down from the headlight and slid most of his fingers in
his back pockets. 'Youcome on with. me."
Kid caught up to him on the unpainted steps. "Is this Nightmare'S
place?" He put his hand on Denny's small, warm shoulder.
Denny looked back. "Used to be." His vest, showiog rough-out
388 Dhalgren
leather, then scuffed tanning, swung against his ribs. "Just about anybody slaYS here now. Even Thirteens been crashing here. The way he
goes on, you'd think he was gonna make it his new place.'
Kid frowned. "What ... happened to his old onel"
Denny frowned back. oWeR, everybody's moved around since ... "
He nodded. "The kids in the commune, they all went to the other side
of park. Dragon lady moved her bunch up this side of Cumberland. And Thirteen couldn't Stay in that damn aparlment no more ...
but you was there." Denny's frown questioned Kid's.
"Why ... ?" Kid asked, because there was no answer he oould supply.
"The smell," Denny said, "for one thing," and went up the steps.
Kid followed. "Oh, yeah. That ... " which made sense; but not the
shifting and rearrangement during the robbed duration. The whole tape
of reality which he had been following had somehow overturned. Lt
still continued; he still followed. But during some moment when he
had blinked, days had elapsed and everything right had shifted left:
Everything left was nOw right. "Hey, the last time you saw me, how
long was I with-?"
"Shhh," Denny said. "Everybody's asleep. " He pushed open the door.
"'It ain1 t even six o'clock in the moming", I bet."
And Kid suddenly did not want an answer. He asked instead in a
softer voice: "Then what are you doing up?"
"I get up real early SOme times.' Denny grinned back over his shoulder as Kid followed him down the hall. "Sometimes I sleep all day, 100.
You can do that here ... but then I'm up all night."
By the hall baseboard, tight black hair shocked from the end of a
sleeping bag. Beyond a doorway, on a couch, a naked man with red hair
all over his tan, freckled was with a very
blond girl wedged between himself and the couch back. Over his bare
ankle, Kid could see her sandal, the nearly rolled cuff of her jeans. Her
arm, pale from the sleeve of a navy pea-jacket, moved up the torn upholstery, then fell. Someone in another room stopped snoring, cleared
his throat; coughed, was silent.
Denny glanced around. "You wanna do it in the bathroom?"
"No." Kid struck Denny's shoulder with his hand's heel. "I don't
want to do it in the bathroom." While Denny blinked, curious, the
bathroom door at the end of the hall opened and Smokey walked out,
sleepy, in nothing but jeans , her fly hanging open. With neither shielding nor greeting, she passed.
Leaning against the water lank, Kid saw the splotched dummy
looped in chain-before the door swung to.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 389
"l'm in here. n
Which is where the Hatley bad been moved.
"How come you get a TOom all by yourself ... ?" Kid asked, realizingwith the last word that three of the bundles among the shovels (why
shovels?), pipes, lumber, and canvas, were people in sleeping bags.
Someone had built a loft.
Three steps up the ladder, Denny looked back over his shoulder.
"You corne up. n
Denny's boots went over the edge. Kid climbed. The planks (they
gave some with his hand and knees) were strewn with blankets. The
size of a double bed, the platform was without pillow or mattreSs. "I
keep ali my shit up here," Denny explained, pushing himself back
among wrinkled cloth. By his left hand was an army compass, a green·
shirt (with gold trim) fresh pressed and wrapped in plastic, a dagger
whose handle was a ball-in-claw; and a gaming case on whose outside were long, alternately black and black-outlined triangles for
backgammon.
Kid crawled forward through army drab and a weave of paler green
rippled througb wilh an electric-blanket cord. In the window tbat rose
above the platform, a mottled shade let tan light on the tangle. He
pulled his feel under him to sit and realized his arm was sbaking. "How
come you don't have half a dozen people sleeping up here with you?"
"I tell 'em to get the fuck out." Dennis hands lay knotted in his lap.
A zodiacal poster hung on the wall: Scorpio. And another of Koth,
the Dark Angel. "It's sort of nice up here," Kid whispered. His throat
was tight. I'm scared of him, he realized. And I like him. "Get the rest
of your clothes oIT."
"Why?"
Kid let out a breath. "Nothing.' He thumbed open the top button
and tugged down his zipper. "Go on." He pulled his penis and (esticles
free of the closing V of brass teeth and let his shoulders relax against
the plywood wall.
The ceiling would not let Denay Slaad. With hunkered back and
crouched knees, the boy walked across (he bedding, his arms swinging like a skinny blond ape. And fell. Kid flexed his knee under Denny's
hand. Denny's hair swung forward, brushed Kid's belly.
His mouth is cold! Kid thought, and pulled his hand away a little
sharply. Then he realized tllat it was only that the boy's lips Were wet.
Heat covered his thickening penis. He bent his knees and clamped
them on Denny's flanks. He pushed his hand down his stomach,
through moving hair. Saliva in his wiry groin was already cool. "That's
390 Dhalgren
good. Make it wet." His fingers butted the base. He pushed back
Denny's hair, suddenly bending (and failing) to see the flattened
cheeks, the distended mouth. The hair fell back. He cupped the back
of Denny's neck. An image of the corpse in the shaft made him let his
breath; he. wished it hadn't. An equally surprising urge to smack the
bobbing head away. Kid grunted, "Unn . ..• and then again, "Unn ... "
and had to close his eyes at the sensation. He pressed his palm against
the warm ear. The head moved up and his penis was cold.
"Is it okay?" Denny asked.
"Yeah ... ft
Heat fell down it like a loose ring. His scrotal sack loosened between
his thighs,then shriveled when spit ran down hiS leg, inside his pants.
. The moving head shook Kid's arm to ,the shoulder. He reached for
Denny's shoulders. Denny tightened his fingers on KidS thigh, let go,
let himself be pulled up to lay with his chest on Kid's, a clutch ofchain
and crushed vest between them.
Denny's face was hard and amazed. "What you want?" All the small
muscles ,of chin, cheek, and jaw were visible.
Kid rubbed Denny's back. "I want you to take the rest of your Iucking clothes off." Denny's skin was hot and dusty dry.
With his, other hand, Kid reached between them to move his cock,
caught between cre .... ed denim.
Denny jerked back to his knees, took a breath, and began to unzip
his pants. Kid thought: he doesn't want me to touch his dick. Something like anger gathered in his stomach.
Denny said sofdy and hoarSely, "You don't have to take yours off."
He worked his jeans back beneath his knees, stopped to pull handfuls
of chain from his neck.
Kid scratched his belly. Denny stopped all motion, his eyes caught
Kid's groin. Something happened in Kid's throat and to his mouth that
it was easy to think was fear, was easier to think desire.
Kid's cock, hardening, rolled up his thigh.
Denny's throat released the little air he tried to hold.
"Take your pants ,off ... " Kid checked anger against desire. Checking only spilled the anger into his voice. "Goon ..• » Desire remained,
a heavy heat under his stomach.
Denny sat back to pull off his boots. On the right, the outer half of
the heel was wom to the leather. He pulled the left off more quickly.
Loops of chain ren around his ankle. The knob of bone divided three
strands from four: a dog's choke collar, wrapped several times. Denny
leaned back to pull his pants off.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 391
Kid looked at Dennys hands, Denny's feet, Dennys groin. His own
back, against the wall, was slightly stiff. Denny, changing the texture
of his movements, now began to fold his jeans, not looking at Kid. To
relieve his shoulders, Kid sat forward. Then he Teached out and pulled
the jeans out of Denny's hands and tossed them in the corner with the
boots and blankets. Dennys expression, as ltis eyes sought something
other than Kid's, moved from confusion to belligerence.
Kid smiled, and the smile became the soft laughter for a house full
of sleepers. 'Come on."
Denny pushed himself forward. Then he said hoarsely: 'Thats pretty funny I should freak out now, ain't it?' The dry, hot skin brushed
Kids, pressed Kids, a hand between their shoulders: heel hard, four light
pressures and the length of thumb. Kid looked down at where the blacklined nails touched him. He reached around Denny's shoulders to cover
the boy's fingers with his own. Child);? he thought. And then, with concern: Why has this child brought me here? He tightened both arms
across Dennys back: Denny was shivering. "Hey .. ." Kid rubbed the
bony stalk of Dennys spine down to where the nesh thickened and became soft. Then up. Then down. "Hey, cut that out. Whatl; the matter?"
Denny still shook. "Nothing."
I'm afraid. And I want to stop this. Shit, no! "Come on, then. You
try to relax." Kid worked further from the wall across the piled blankets. Holding Denny on top, he made a rocking motion. Denny turned
his face away so that the side of Kid's face was all a-brush with yellow.
'If we just lay around like-"
One of the people under the loft turned over. And Denny stopped
breathing for the count of three; then went on:
"-like this, we ain't never gonna do nothing. It
Go on and do what you want then, was anger. With the sentence in
his mouth unsaid, Kid realized: I'm twelve years older than him. He
said, "Get down there and suck it," which, at the scrambling over his
chest and stomach and the welling heat in his groin, he knew was lust.
He reached fOT the hair and hunched shoulders between his legs. With
his leg, he rolled Denny over on his side, pushing and pushing. Denny
held Kid\; thighs. Their congress was intense and diligent, till Denny,
not holding him, was hammering near Kid:' hip. 'Okay •.. ?" Kid panted, and let the boy go. A quarter toward orgasm, Kid hunkered down
to press his hard groin on a hip, a thigh, something.
"Hey. . ." Breathing hard, Denny lay on his back. He raised his
hand, glistening knuckles strung with grey mucous. "I guess I came."
He grinned. "What am I gonna do with this stuff?"
392 Dhalgren
"Eat it," Kid said. "That what you usually do?"
"Yeah." Denny looked back up at the ceiling and put his fore knuck-
• Ie in his mouth, turned his hand to lick the heel.
Kid put his arm, moist with effort, across Denny's thin,. hard chest,
still dry, and rubbed on the bony hip. Denny took his two middle fingers out of his mouth. "You didn't Come yet?"
"Nope."
"Go ••. go on and dO what you want."
Yeah, Kid thought, that's anger. He laughed.
"When I was little," Denny said and pressed the back of his hand
against his open mouth, "there Were these two brothers who were the
strongest kids in my neighborhood. I used to want to be like them. And
once they told me they were so sllong because they used to eat each
others' cum. I didn't even know what they were talking about then. I
hadn't even eVer jerked off, you know?" Denny turned to look at Kid.
"I guess it's protein or.something. You do it too?"
Kid shook his head. "No.'
"Then how'd you know?"
Kid shrugged. "You JUSt looked like you were somebody who
might."
"'What's that mean?"
"I don't knOw." Kid squeezed the tight muscle under the tissuey skin
of Denny's arIlL "Maybe it's bocause you're strong. Uke they said." He
put his leg over Denny's, then suddenly sat. He felt his hair brush the
ceiling and hunched. "You like that, hey?"
Denny grinned again, and held Kid's cock in his slick hand. Kid
started to rock. Denny said, "You like girls?"
Kid was surprised. "Yeah."
"You wanoa fuck a girl?"
"Why don't you just open your mouth? Or turnover, huh?"
:Just a second. Lemme up-"
"Hey, look, all you gotta-" But Denny strUggled up. Kid let himselfbe pushed away, .annoyed and curious.
"I'll be right back," Denny whispered, dropping O\".r the edge of the
board. Kid Sighed .and pushed his hand down between his legs, I may
be crazy; he thought, but this one's nuts! He reached under his shoulder and pulled flat a fold of blanket. Look o\"er the edge •.. ? No. He
stared at the ceiling that had brushed his head. Former owners had
painted the cracked plaster white without spackle.
People came into the room,
Creatures of Light and Darkness 393
She said, "Where?"
Denny said, "Up there, on my bed. Go on."
The platform shook as someone started up the ladder. Kid looked.
Her curly hair, confused with sleep, her astounded eyes, her smiling
mouth cleared the edge. She said, "Urn . .. " then giggled, and then,
"Hello."
"Go on up," Denny:S voice urged.
She looked back down. "I am." She came over the edge. and crawled
forward, breasts swinging out against her arms, in against one. another.
She had once brought him whiskey in the bathtub when he had
been fouled with blood. "Hey!" Kid said, "how'Ie you?" She smiled
again and pulled herself to sit cross-legged, with lots of dark hair in the
triangle of heel, heel, and groin.
Denny came up too, leaned on his forearms, grinning.
I am being used, Kid thought. For what, I am not sure.
"So what are we supposed to do now?" Kid asked.
"He likes to get his dick sucked," Denny said.
The girl reached out, with the tip of her tongue in her teeth.
"Hey!" Kid said to Denny, ·You get on up here!"
Denny's expression went momentarily blank. Then he scrambled up
onto the plalforIlL The girl giggled again, and suddenly fell against
him. "Hey ... " Kid caught her, and while she laughed, he scraped his
shoulder on the wall and hit his elbow. She didn't let go his penis.
Denny tried not to giggle and waS saying, "Come on, now. Be quiet
... " He had scooted to the corner, and rocked and hugged his knees.
"Hey ... " Kid said again and moved a book (Dennys) from under
his shoulder. Something in the. midst of the pressure tickled his chest.
He looked down. She had her face against him: it was her eyelash opening and closing. "Hey," he said a third time, and caught his hands in
her curly hair and pulled her head back.
She just said, "Annnn . .. '" He kissed her. She grabbed his shoulders up near his neck and pushed back with her tongue. He held himself up with his left hand, mashed. the soflness of her shoulder with his
right, of her breast, of her belly. When he pushed his middle fingers
against the flesh folded in her cunt, she swung up her knee,. with shaking calf and thigh. The entrance was soft. IBSide his fingers found a
sloppy firmness that slowly ga\"e and grew softer. She made lots of little noises, and her hand on his penis became maddening as feathers.
Trying (arid succeeding) not to take his tongue ,out of her mouth, he
moved around her, crawling over her large thighs, and wedged himself
394 Dhalgren
between them. He pulled out to go in again, and opened his eyes .to
find hers wide and staring toward Denny. But they came back to his,
and at the same time she swung her legs up and around him like hot
pillows. He dug in her with penis and tongue, yet
gears inside him; he let it sloW; and from the slowness buIld!.
himself, he looked up with jogging sight. Denny, moved forward his
knees, with cantilevered cock, his mouth slightly open, and closmgmumbling things too soft to hear.
Kid turned his face against hers and momentarily saw himself surrounded by soft, by wet, bywann. He thrashed in iI, came:.a
single intense spasm that left her rolling under him and sucking at hIS
mouth, the hard place between the mashed breaslS pressing his.
Not felt since sometime far back in adolescence, he wanted VIOlently
to be £ree of physical contacl. He rolled from her, feeling silly. while she
caught her breath and the cold slapped his and. stomach-as he knew it had slapped hers. That wasn t It eIther. On hIS back
he worked himself against her again; she made no protest, but
to push her face against him. "Hey .... He raised one arm to slide It
beneath her head. "Hey, come here." With the other, he motioned to
Denny.
Denny stretched his legs out and slid over. Kid caught him around
the shoulder. Denny lay dbwn, put his leg over Kid's, his cock a small
bar across Kid's hip. 'You didn't come, did you?" Kid asked her.
'Urn,' she said, surprised, and blinked at him.
He tugged at Denny without looking at him. "I shot my load and
your girl friend hasn't had hers yet. Get down there and do something
aboutit.tt
"Huh?' He felt Denny push himself up on one elbow.
Kid licked her nose. Shesquinted. "r want to watch you eat my cum
out of her pussy," which was patently untrue. ThaIs what I'm being
used for! He wa;ted to watch her face: Her eyes were half-closed, glistening slivers between the lashes. Her Upper lip brushed and
the lower. Denny's neck was two hard hands with a valley between. Kid
pulled it forward. "Go on, do it." .
Denny grunted his protest. The girl suddenly looked $urpnsed.
Kid clamped his hand On Denny's neck, in time to see fear below the
protest. "Go on, mothetfucker. Or rll bust your head open!"
Denny swallowed and dropped his fac,:, .
Kid closed his fingers in the yellow haIr, pushed the bobbmg head
and rocked it, less roughly than he thought he should.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 395
She said, "Oh .... once and moved her leg. He looked at her: she
kept the surprised expression. Inches away from her face, he questioned her with his eyes (she wouldn't answer), kissed her gently, harder, till at last she closed her eyes-tight-and began to gasp. He felt
her hand touch and avoid his in Denny's hair, so let go (but pressed his
leg against the boy's back) while he kissed her. He caressed her limp,
long breast, rolling on her ribs. A heavy girl of ... seventeen? Eighteen? Older than Denny; still a child. Her soft tongue blunted on his
hard one. He held himself away from her, touching her only with hand
and mouth. Once her hands hit his at his arched belly, returned to
Denny's hair, and he heard the boy gasp. Denny was flexing on the
wrinkled blankets as his head rocked and wobbled. "Unn ... " she said,
"Unn . .. Unnn .. . Unn ... " Then she squealed and clutched him.
Kid dropped on her, gathering what was soft about her sides between his hands and elbows.
"Get your 'fucking knee off my head," Denny said.
With the tips of her fingers, she climbed Kids back, and sighed, and
tightened her hands in their climbing.
Denny pulled free of their legs and flopped against Kid.
"How you, sloppy.face''' Kid put his arm around Denny. The boy
buried his chin, already cold, in Kid's shoulder. "Do you do this to
everybody who drops by for a blow job in the morning?"
"It's. her idea-, n Denny said.
She giggled and said, "It is no!! »
Kid felt the boy's groin against his hip. "Denny); still got a hard-on,"
he told the girl. "You want to take him on front and center?"
She raised her hand and laughed again. "Sure. But he won't do that."
Kid turned to Denny. "You don't like to fuck?" He was thirsty. But
you have to ask for something to drink later ...
"I guessnot,n Denny said. "I mean it won' t stay up ... u It carne out
with sudden, adolescent gravity. " ... see?" And it was softening.
"His tongue sure stays up, hey?" Kid said. The girl rubbed the side
.of his knee with hers.
Kid rubbed back, readIed between Denny's legs.
what are you ... TI
"WoopS!" Kid said. "It's up again. Come on, I want to see you try."
The girl rolled on her back. "He won't do it."
"You shut up .•
"r think he should. • She folded her hands under her breaslS. "But
he keeps saying he's gay."
396 Dhalgren
"Why don't you layoff me?" Denny said.
"1 got a hand fun of your dick." He moved his fingers so that
Denny's crotch hair rubbed the ring of knuckle, forefinger, and thumb.
"'It's hard now. n
"Denny ... ?" the girl said and uncrossed her hands.
Wrapped between ham and heel, Denny's cock bobbed but did not
wilt. "Don't wony," Kid said, "I won't let go ofit.·
"Shit," Denny said and pushed himself up. ·Okay, but it won't
work.' Dennys knee hit Kid's stomach.
"Uhhh .. . "
Denny's hands landed on Kid's chest. "Hey. yon let go!"
"So? You still got a hard-on. You sure that's the only thing you're
worried aboutl" Kid sat up and put One hand on Denny's hip, and
rubbed the boy's buttocks with the other, moved his hand between
them, to hair and loose scrotal flesh. Denny\; skin was still brick dry.
His own and the girlS (one soft thigh spread under his calf) were moist.
She moved and made a sound like moaning; could have been mouthed
laughter; even protest.
Kid put one hand on her belly. pressed a finger in a crease. He
moved his hand onto her hair and mirrored her moan with his voice.
A muscle in Denny's thigh moved on Kid's wrist. The testicles lay
on his palm. Kid brushed the undershaft with his fingers. ·You like
that?" He held the penis, moved his hand out to cover, the circumcised
head, back so that thick flesh moved under innards rigid as dry sponge.
"You just think about the rest of my load in there, what you ain't got
on your face. You won't lose it ... yeah!" because his other hand,
spreading the third and fourth finger, pressed and she gave, wet with
"Go on ... .Ii
Denny lowered himself .• he muscle in his thigh shook till his knee
slipped on the blanket.
"His dick and my two fingers in your pussy," Kid said. "They can't
all give out at once. Hey; look at him hump!"
Her hand lay loose: small fingers on white palms where the sweat
was shiny as mica. The tmgers moved to dose and did not close, moved
to open and did not: she touched Denny's shoulders as his pale hair
curled against her face. Kid felt the boy shake, the cock sliding on his
knuckles. He took his hand from between them to hold himself up.
Denny's body flattened on her larger one beneath. Kid prodded between
them again. "Hey. boy ... there you go. You like that, huh?" He balanced himself to rub her arm, and felt a muscle twitch in her shoulder.
Creatures of Light and Darhness 397
"You like it too, don't you?" On the seventh or eighth motion, he could
again move his middle finger knuckle deep in her beside Denny's scrotal sack which, having shriveled ,tight as possible, now unwrinkled on
his palm. Denny backed up to push. Her hand jerked on his shoulder.
Kid could not see her face. Denny pushed again and her counterpush
beneath him made her legs sway. They're so silent, he thought, and
caught his breath; his own cock was tight and tense and hard enough
to hutto He moved his hand from between them, and lay down beside
them, pressed himself against them, his dick along the flexing crevice
between, one arm across Denny's back, the other around the top of her
head. Denny did not break rhythm. Kid nuzzled between their faces,
trying to kiss her, but she would not turn toward him. Denny\; breath
was loud as an engine. "Hey. you fuck that shit ... " Kid whispered.
"You bust that pussy wide open, cocksucker! Bury him in pussy. bitch!"
Denny was a motion against his right hip; against his left, her hip
thrust anei shook under Denny's falling, and falling, and falling faster.
So he moved his hand down between Denny's buttocks; felt the first
sweat on the dry body. Denny pushed harder. She had raised her far
leg around his thighs, and was panting. Kid reached over her calf,
thinking, maybe she won't like that, and between Denny's legs, moving down a few inches so he could cup balls; Denny growled, and he
waS going to take his hand away. but the growl articulated, "Yeah ... !
That's right. Go on ... " He jabbed his hand forward and she, beneath,
jerked in a way that should have had a cry with it. Denny pushed and
pushed and pushed and pushed and stopped pushing, while she went
on, and let out all his air. "Jesus Christ ... " muffled against her neck.
His ass relaxed. Then he began to pant.
Kid rubbed his neck, and Denny laughed against her, reached up to
brush his hair from her face. She was panting too.
"Hey?" Kid brushed her cheek with his knuckle. Her wide eyes
locked his. "You make it this time?" With his other hanel, he pushed
his cock down against her thigh. "I can go again."
She flashed an uncertain smile. "I'm okay."
"Shit!" Kid let his head drop with a bark of laughter. "I'm tired, that's
what 1 am." He closed his eyes, and a breath later heard them making
movements. His own groin, still engorged, was numbing. 1 bet I'm
going to wake up with cramps under my balls, he thought, and didn't
care. Denny touched his shoulder, tugged a little. So he rolled back
against them. Denny made another breathy sound, and hugged Kid
tightly. suddenly pushed his face against Kid's neck. "Hey . .. t" He
398 Dhalgren
caught the boy. who was giggling all panty like a puppy (like her, he
remembered, when she had first fallen. against him). He moved his
hand downlhe hard llank till his knuckles tOllched her softer one. "Go
to sleep or somelhing." Denny (ook his face away. and Kid worked his
arm benealh her neck (ber hair was much crisper than Ihe boy's, and
the back of her neck was moist and hot; his own, moist and cooling)
and felt comfortable enough (0 let himself drift. Drifting, he realized
how loud Denny's brealh was and listened for heIS. It was slower and
farther away. Then, aEter a time that might have been sleep, it was
faster. He reached for her, only brushed her, and thought: A strangeness, heY, and beauti{nl. His lips, drying, had adhered to one anolher.
they tore apart wilh the bteath and Ihe mumbled word: beautiful. Released, he fell away into sleep.
He woke in annoyance IIlat turned immediately to pleasure. Somebody was blowing him. He grilUled on the darkness of his lids, reached
dc;>Wn tbTO\1gh three levels of Ihought. Lanya? No, !his olher girl. His
hand glanced from bone under soft hair to hit the hard, tight shoulder.
Denny grunted.
"What you doing?" Kid askell. He rolled his head left, then right On
the creased blanket, Ihen again with his eyes open. The girl was gone.
Denny said, "You were asleep all the time wilh a God-damn bardon.I was just-" Kid locked his fingers in Denny's hair and pulled his
head down.
"That's what you started doing and you ain't finished me yet."
Denny dropped his mouth again.
Kid moved one fist out on the blanket beside his face, hoping it was
still warm from her. One fantasy melllory of Denny's face between her
legs and his penis Ihrust between them ..• he moved from fantasy and
lay. with his mouth open, his head back, each muscle loosening; Denny
held Kid's balls while he sucked; and that felt good. l<id held the 'boy's
sides with his legs. And came. It was somelhing like hot oil poured in
cotton (colton into flame; flame, out beneath water. Water and ashes
and ashes washedthrollgh him). "Come on up here."
Denny lay down on Kid's chest.
Kid rubbed his back, city and
papery as before. He wanted to say
lhanks, but decided it would be silly. so he squeezed Denny's shoulder
instead.
"Your come tastes different ftom mine,' Denny said.
"Yeah?" Kid closed his eyes.
"It's more, you know, liquid. And therel; more of it."
"I'm bigger than you."
Creatures of Light and Darhness 399
And it's more bitter."
"You know," Kid said, "you're a pretty funny little guy. Whored your
girl friend go?"
"She got-"
Somebody came into the room, moved somelhing below them,
turned.
Kid looked down across the blanket as a nondescript top.of-a-head
left through Ihe doorway.
"-got up a little while ago and went out." Denny's fist uncurled on
Kid's shoulder.
"Oh. You two do this a lot?"
"Huh?H
"Drag people into bed all the time?"
"Not like Ihis."
"Like how?"
"I don't know. It's her idea, most of Ihe time. She's my best friend
here,"
Kid nodded, his chin lapping the top of Denny's head. "Is she ascorpion too?"
"Naw. She's not a member. Not like Filament. Or lady of Spain. She
just likes to hang around wilh them." He shifted. "r mean us. I bring
gIIys around for her sometimes. As long as she lets me watch. A couple of times I messed around with Ihe guys, just a little. But not like
. .. well, what we did."
"You like messing around with her too?'
Denny shrugged. "I don't know. I guess so. But I never done that
before. I mean get inside."
Kid laughed.
"Sometimes she'd tell me I should, but I never did. It just embarrassed me, you know? I couldn't keep it bard, I mean before."
"Oh.· Kid tried not to smile, even though Denny could not see it.
"I can get guys for her two or tbree times a week, sometimes. She
says she don't wanna be one guy's girl friend."
·She likes two at a time? I can dig it."
"Maybe.' Denny moved a little. "We de> aD¥lhing together, any old
crazy Ihing, you know? If I told her to do something real crazy. like go
up in an old building where Ihere might be people hiding with guns,
she'ddo it. We found all sorts of junle In old blliJdings. There's lots of
stuff around."
Kid crossed his arms over Dennyl; back; Ihe warm mouth brushed
his chest.
400 Dhalgren
"I like to watch her make it with guys,' Denny said. "When I blew
you, were you ,lhinking about her?'
"You'd like that, wouldn't you? No, I wasn't. I mean only a little at
first."
"I dont care what you were Ihinking about,' Denny said. "You think
you know an awlullot about what I like, huh?'
Now Kid shrugged. "I think I like you. Haws that?' Relaxing from
the shrug, he began to laugh. "You want to suck it, sit on fine
byrne. Now yoltre going to tum around and run off and look all scared
and wide-eyed at me every time we see each other from now on, huh?
But I want to make love to you, sometinte. Just you.'
"Like I was a girl?'
Kid Sighed. "Yeah. If you want to put it that way."
"I'd like that."
"I know you would." fie euITed the back of Denny's head with his
hand.
"When you jerk oIT, do you do that like what I did?'
"Huh?"
"You knOw. Eat it."
No. I've tasted my own a couple of times. Hell, I guess I ate it
once or twice, just to see. 'D
"I do it all the time," Denny said, with resolve. "How did you know
I did?'
"I've just known other people who did that toO, and ..• well. I don't
know."
JlOh.D
"Is she going to come back?" Kid asked.
Denny shrugged.
'Oh," Kid said again and thought he'd been saying that a lot. So he
closed his eyes.
He listened for people moving around ,the house, thinking it must be
growing late in the morning. Something-Dennys elbow-hit the side
of his head, and he realized he was waking up after drifting all again.
He opened his eyes and pushed himself 10 sitting position. Denny
lay curled away from him. Kid breathed deeply; his head was heavy
with the detritus of pleasure. He rubbed his shoulder and it tingled,
paused at the chain that crossed the hair on his chest. It still held: from
a very long time ago, a waking and a sleeping and a waking, he recalled
the blond Mexican who had surprised him in the street. Kid frowned,
and began to reach around for his clothes.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 401
He had to go to the bathroom, for one thing. His head ached slightly, and his mouth tasted like unflavored gelatin, solid a'round tongue
and teeth. He looked for his pants, stopped, put his hand on Denny's
buttock. A face, he thought, hatcheted on the obstemc line. Cheeks,
he thought, sucked in with astonishment. If you hang around. I'm
going to tear it up. Denny rubbed his nose and was probably awake but
not moving.
Kid pulled on his pants, dragged his vest and his boot over the edge
of the platform. The people in the sleeping bags were still there. Bending to put on his vest, he fouud his flanks sore; he leaned on the jamb
to put on his boot, and for the first time in a while wished he had a
second. (A vision of his own hands crumbling dirt between them. the
dirt falling on water.) He stepped into the hallway.
The tan shade and the warmth in Denny'S loft had intimated a false
summer.
The sky a dirty window pane high on the hall wall was
stormy. The bathroom door opened: not Thirteen's girl friend, but Thirteen himself. His long hair was bushy from sleep. "Hey I didn't know
you was around here?' Thirteen nodded heavily, his voice roughened
by fatigue. "Ain't seen you in a couple of days." Kid went into the bathroom and while he urinated, busied himself not thinking about when
the last time he had actually seen Thirteen was. He ground his fist
against his sore side and reflected: it probably isn't possible to really
fuck yourself to death. Punching his tongue into bitter comers of his
mouth, he sqUinted out the window. Stormy?
Incredible suspensions in the dry air, and he moved between
them, dribbling and/or blowing out all holes. He waited for some
bright precipitate. His water splashed and silenced. He massaged his
limp genitals, not with desire, but rather to press some feeling back.
His knuckles got wet, and he looked down wondering if it were urine
or final mucus. Pleasure can be an appalling business, he thought and
buttoned his pants.
In the hallway, he stood sucking his salty fingers until he realized
what he was tasting, wondered why he was doing it, and remembered
Denny. He grinned: A psychologist had once called him a maddening
combination oflability and willfulness.
Then she walked into the hall without seeing him, and opened the
front door. He took his fingers from his mouth, recognized her curly
hair, tried to envision her full shoulders beneath the blue sweatshirt
she now wore.
She went down the steps.
402 Dhalgren
Curious, he walked to the door. If she turnS around, he thought, her
eyes will be red, hey? . . She stopped by the car, prying beneath the bent nm "\Vlth one fIn ..
ger, looking absently down the block; looked back at him.
The little chill was all anticipation.
She blinked surprised brown eyes at him, from a face that could
have been angry. . "Hey," he said, and smiled at her from the top of the whlch
became more and more difficult to do before her blank bhnking, ex ..
cept in confusion. In confusion, smiling, he walked down. "I missed
you when you cut out." There are some storms, he thought beneath
the mangled sky, it's easier to walk into.
"Sure," she said as he came down the steps. 'I bet you did.· Her fIn ..
gers kept moving on the broken glass.
"If you keep that up, you're going to cut your-" .
"There's something funny about you,· she said with a look of dis ..
taSte, "that was runny, or queer, or something."
"Look, tI he said, "you're not going to call me names, n and realized
he did not know what hers was. That brought him crashing through
his embryo anger till he was much closer to her than he'd to
be: his fingers against his leg were trying to take the same paslUon as
hers. His face pulled to mimic hers. "When he was ... was with me, that was all between you and him.
I might as well not have been there!"
"When I was with you, that was all between you and him. 1 might
as well have been beating my meat," and felt, saying it, the campari ..
son was unfair. "He says you're his best friend. What is it? He thinks
he's doing for you, you think you're doing it for him?" His face,
straining after hers, registered a sudden sadness inside him SO intensely
it took him instant after instant to see her expression had changed.
"I used to be the smartest person in my class!" she said, suddenly.
He wondered why his eyes were burning till he saw tears in hers.
"1 used ..• to be the smartest person in my class!" She dropped her
head.
He dropped his, whispered, "Hey, .. " and put his hand (too gently.
he thought) on the back of her neck, touched his forehead to hers.
'Why don't you go away?" she said with sad, exhausted anger.
"Okay." He squeezed, snorted the faint laughter of withdrawal, and
went back up the steps palm cold; her neck had been warm).
Halfway up the hall, though, he was frowning.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 403
When he climbed back into the loft, Denny (between Kid's fists)
turned over and blinked and gtunted,
"Hey, your girl friend's outside all upset."
"Oh, shit!" Denny said and sat up. He gtound the heels of his pahns
against his eyes, then started for the edge of the loft.
Kid gtabbed his unchained ankle,
Denny looked back.
"You guys go thtough this much trauma every time you screw?·
"It's my Iault," Denny said.
"Sure," Kid nodded. ·Comeon back here, will you?"
."1, better go. 1 guess I been doing too much talking about you. 1 guess
I am,t talked to .her about nothing else for a pretty long time.'
remmds me," Kid said. "You're making a lot more out of
that lady m the department store with the bee .. bee gun than it's really
worth, you know?"
Denny grinned. "I been talking about you a hell of a lot longer than
that," and went Over the side.
.KId lay back, gtunted, "Fuck ... ' and rolled over, wishing there was
someone else there. Maybe, he thought, very tired, he'll bring her back.
Denny, he fIgured, would return, Should he have actually touched her?
(He .recognized the beginnings of a welter of paranoid speculation; rec ..
og=ed as well that sleep lay on the other side of it.) Touched her in
the street? If were lovers, he would be able to find out in a day. a
week, a month If It was the proper thing to do. Hell, should he have told
Denny about it at all? He was being used: he didn't like it. That's not the
Sort of shit you lay on somebody you just dragged into bed. Lovers? He
decided he didn't like her at all. (She, among silent others had once
:",id, .. bye.·) On the other m.nd, he shouldn't go around
In em.otlOnal closets like that. (He turned over again, wishing Lanya had
not disappeared.) Silly. stupid kids! Why did Denny drag' her in in the
first Righteous indignation, he finally decided, was easier. For the
first tune m a long while he was aware of the chain around him. Care ..
ful, he mulled, that it doesn't come apart-not sure why he should be
afraid it might.
2
He woke alone.
Kid sat up, with his eyes closed, for half a minute. The aiT in Ihe loft
was heavy and dry. Would the pulsing at the back of his head become
404 Dhalgrtn
a beadache? People moved in other rooms. The bathroom door closed
three times. Grinding his knees on the blanket, he turned for his
clothes.
Dennys wer" gone.
In another room a black woman laughed.
His pants were still on. He shrugged up his vest and, with neither
buttoned, climbed down. One of the sleeping bags was still occupied.
Two others were shed in qUilted rings.
He leaned on the wall to pull up his boot. He Wished again he had
the Qther, but felt habit dissolve the Wish. He went into the hall Wondering if he'd encounter Delmy or the girl fitst.
FrOID the door ahead, light slapped acroSs the han and made him
squint.
"Hey, Dragon lady!"
Kid looked in.
Nightmare, squatting on one of the mattresSes, kneaded his thick,
scarred shoulder. "Hey. Dragon lady. you beell down!"
The gorgeous beast dazzled about tht shabby room.
Nightmare let himself thud backward agaihSt the wall. A figure under
a blanket moved away. Nighttnare laughed and rocked and jangled.
"Pown and back! Oh, hey. man. And bach!" Dragon lady turned,
killed her lights. And laughed. Kid watched her stained teeth gape.
A dozen people slept around the room. Nightmare and Dragon lady
talked on raucously:
"1 brought you ·colTee!» She breathed heavily, breasts stretching her
vesfs rawhide laces. "Adam and Baby are out there noW putting it together. Found a whole fucking warehouse full!' Her face was long and
dark as bittersweet chocolate. "Brought you back a whole carton.'
"Instan.t?ft
"No." She made a fist. "Nol"-insistent as an economics teacher.
"Tbe real thing. My boys are making it in the kitchen."
Nightmare rocked and hugged his shouldelS. "Hey. we're gonna do
up a little calTeiR. here! Thafs reaDy good. Oh, Yeah!"
Copperhead suddenly. knees wide, swung up to sit. Head low between his shouldelS, he shook his hair. Freckled hands crossed on his
darker genitals, he blinked at the room. His lids were puffy so that you
just saw two slashes of gold; which turned toward Kid. Copperhead
frowned, cocked his head; his mouth hung open, his lips, marked with
a line Kid knew was dried blood (because his own gums bled when he
slept), sagged from even, yellow teeth. The girl in the pea jacket
moaned and tried to wedge between the cushion and the couch-back.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 405
Nightmare swung his hand at Kid. "Thats him."
"Sure looks like him." Dragon lady\; heavy lips pursed.
Nightmare'S thin ones grinned.
"What you weatin' that thing around the house for?" Copperhead
asked.
Kid looked down at the orchid-on his hand. "It makes shaking my
dick after 1 take a leak a real adventure." He took a breath, tried not to
search out the memory; searched and found a blank.
"Not to mention zipping up your fly," Copperhead said. "It's open. "
He turned to pull his pants out from under the blond girl, who
squeaked and tried to roll into the upholstery again.
him?" Dragon u.dy asked, mocking.
Kid nodded. "It's me." He leaned back on the door jamb and dropped
to a squal. "It's going to stay open for a while, too, 1 guess. I don't feel
like castrating myself.'
"He's really funny." Nightmare pushed the end of his braid back over
his shoulder. "Hes a good kid. He doesn't make lot of noise. But when
he does something, it usually turns out pretty good."
Thats a good image to live up to, Kid decided; and decided not to
say very much more. When had he put on the orchid ... ? When ... ?
Copperhead looked unpleasant, yanked again: "Will you get olT my
fuckin' clothes? 1 wanna get dressed!"
"Hey. will you guys bring in that colTee!" Dragon lady hollered.
Somebody half hidden by the couch raised her head from the crook
of her ann, and dropped it. It was not Dennys girl.
"They been talking a lot about you," Dragon u.dy said. She frowned
at Copperhead. "He ain't been saying nothing nice." She laughed.
"I ain't been saying nothing." Copperhead fumbled at the snap on
his fatigues. One of the· thigh pouches was torn. There were holes in
both knees. "r don't got nothing to say about the Kid."
Nightmare hunkered a little. "I<id, what you got to say about Copperhead?"
Kid shook his head. They want us to fall out and fight right here,
be thought.
Nighlmares laugh started wide, then pulled into gruff, belligerent,
good nature.
Somcl>odyelse raised his head from a pile of blankets, blinked sleepily. then grinned-"Hey!" -and stood, clumsily. scratching first at the
sweaty hair across his forehead, then at !he belly of his undershirt. His
other arm was bandaged to the shoulder. "Hey, ifs the Kid! You Come
on back here for a while?"
406 Dhalgmt
"How you doing, Siam?" Kid hazarded. lhe brown, agoniZed face
rocking back and forth on the bus floor had been ... different? No, not
that different ...
"Pine!" Siam ducked his head, grinning hugely. "I'm okay. I'm fine!"
HiS good hand touched the bandage; the finger bounced down dirty
cloth (Nightmare still kneaded the multiple-headed bulge of a shoulder that spoke of weight lifting sessions). Siam glanced at the others,
got an uneasy look, grinned through the uneasiness, and squatted too,
aping Kid.
Dragon l..adycaUed, "I want some God-damned coffee!"
"They ain't got very many cups." The guy had two in each hand and
three in his arms. His hair was a jangle of scrap gold; chest, chin and
buttocks were all blebs and pustules, his toenails and fingernails filthy,
and he was naked. "I don't think they got enough for everybody." He
looked around.
"Give one to Nightmare, Baby." Dragon Lldy took one for herself.
Denny walked in. He sat next to Kid, qUietly, and leaned on his
crossed legs: the knee ·of his jeans brushed the shin of Kid's.
Nightmare took a cup and motioned Baby to give one to Denny.
"And give the Kid one-"
"-As long as theres one for me." Copperhead got on his second
boot and stamped twice. He looked at Kid.
"I guess Adam and me can share one.' Baby frowned at the cups
clutched to his chest.
Kid ,took hiS cup and thought: If there weren't enough, I suppose
we would have to fight.
Copperhead got one. So did Siam.
"Adam'" Dragon Lldy called. "Baby done passed out the glasses.
What you <loin' with the brew?"
Adam came in, brown face veiled by steam. Steam rolled down over
the chains on hiS chest. He had lots of thick, dark hair. "Here you go."
He poured for Dragon Lldy, and went on to Nightmare. His pants were
too big, bunched under, or just sagging from the chain he used for a belt.
Kid held his cup with both hands, feeling its heat.
In the middle of the room, Baby was exanlining the last cup to see
if a crack went all the way through.
"A Whole warehouse," Dragon Lldy reiterated. "You can go, down
and get it yourself when you run out of what we brought you."
"Shit." Adam sqUinted through the steam. "We got 'em a whole carton." He rubbed his chest; chains growled.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 407
"I don't make no food runs." Nightmare blew steam down over his
hands. "You know I don't make no fuckin' food runs.'
·We IIPt so many Cree loaders; Copperhead said at the coffee
he held on his right knee, "you just may have to." Head still low, he
looked at Kid again. "We get more of 'em every day."
"You got some in there for yllu?" Dragon Lldy finished saying to
Adam, who checked the fUuling pot and nodde.d. Then she looked at
Copperhead and hooted: "You really down on the Kid, hey? Why you
so down on him?"
"'Cause Copperhead's big and dumb," Nightmare said.
"Now I like Copperhead. Hes big, dumb, and mean. The Kid's small
and smart. But I bet he's just as mean as Copperhead.'
"When I got shot,· Siam said, "the Kid pulled me onto the bus. Kid
aiBl t mean--..2'I
"Aw, fuck you!' Nightmare bellowed, and rolled sharply to his
knees.
Siam spilled coffee over his hand.
Nightmare didn't.
Siam put his cup down, shook his fingers, sucked at his knuckles.
Nightmare guffawed, sipped and guffawed again.
Copperhead blinked, rubbed hiS beard against his freckled wrist,
and retreated even farther between his shoulders.
Kid gripped his cup; hiS palm was uncomfortably hot. "Hey, Copperhead?" He flexed his nubs On burning porcelain. "Hey, Copperhead,
why you think they're so anxious to get us after each other?"
The redhead glowered from the couch.
"I'm half Indian," Kid said. ".And you're about ... what? Half nigger?" He glanced at Dragon Lldy, wbo looked back and forth between
them, black eyes a glint in her dark face, as though she were holding a
snicker. Nightmare, his skin, for all his muscles, translucent white,
peered over his cup, and actually looked surprised.
"So I guess they just figure it'll be easy, huh?"
Copperhead's glower ,turned to puzzlement. Then suddenly it broke
out in a laugh.
"Yeah," Copperhead said. "Yeah, only-" He pointed a thumb at
Nightmare, at Dragon Lldy. "Easy, sure. Only half an Indian's a halfbreed or something, right? Half a nigger, anywhere around thiS part of
the world, is still just plain old nigger." This laugh waS a bark that
threw back his head. But the building anger was loosed in contempt
about the roOm.
408 Dha!gren
Dragon Lady's laugh got drowned in colIee, which chattered loudly
below her lowered eyes.
.Copperhead and me-' Kid jutted his arm forward for balance and
rocked to standing-·we're on the same side, aren't we?" He stepped
over someone asleep. "We better be, with you bastards around."
"Man, he got your number, white boy,· Dragon Lady said to Nightmare, chuckling.
"Aw, shut up," Nightmare said.
"He got both your numbers," Copperhead said, ':Jesus Christ-" He
began to dig his hand under the girl on the couch, pulled out his vest.
Kid was about to look at Denny; but Denny's girl stepped into the
for doorway.
She looked very surprised.
Kid walked across the room. He saw Copperhead shrugging into his
vest, watched him. So did Dragon Lady and Nightmare, each with differing smiles.
"You want some colIee?" Kid asked.
The girl took the cup he thrust and looked even more surprised. He
pushed past through the door.
The sink and counter were heaped with dishes. The table was piled
with garbage. A garbage bag underneath had broken. .
Outside the screen door, the sky heaved and twisted like a thing
chained.
Kid stopped on the littered linoleum and raised his hands to his
faceHe'd forgotten the blades.
He pressed the heel of his other hand against one eye. Clean metal
and dirty flesh-he brought his armed hand closer, till metal tickled
his cheek.
Beyond metal and skin and screening, and wooden roofs across the
street, the sky ran ilnd blistered and dribbled on itself.
1 will play, he thought, this game another hour. One more hour.
Then I will go do something else. I'm tired. not complicated. I'm
just tired.
He ground one eye, till light spots superimposed blades, hand and
sky.
l'hey were laughing in the other room.
What do 1 want here?
The boy? he thought to see it fall. 1 stin like him, dolt t 17 He bores
me already (thinking: All that guarantees is that he still likes me).
Creatures of Light and Darkness 409
Lanya, Kid thought angrily, has gone away. Why. Because I'm impOSSible. And realized. astonished, what he wanted was her.
Double laughter separated into a boy's and a girl's. When they
stepped around him, hand in hand, she looked qUickly away. Denny
didn't.
Kid felt his expression change, not sure to what. But it made Denny
stop.
"Get out of here," Denny said to the girl.
She looked between them, puzzled and...-.eager? Then she fled back
into the living room.
After a second. Kid said. "Your girl friend doesn't like me very
much."
Denny's shoulders made some small. sharp motions. "You beenpretIy nice to her."
"Like hell." Maybe, Kid thought, I should tell him to go away, like
he told her. "Come here."
Denny walked over.
Kid reached in his pocket for Tak's battery. "Put this in for me?"
Denny's face made motions small and strange as his shruggings. 1
make up rituals, Kid thought. They try to comprehend them; and
forced the memory of lanya's green eyes shut.
Denny fingered up the projector. (The chain tickled Kid's chest.) Biting his lower lip, Denny unsnapped the sphere. He pushed the battery
between the clips with his thumb.
Kid moved both caged and free fingers on the blades. and let his
hand swing against Denny's pants. "You got a hard-on."
"I know." Denny sucked in his lips and thumbed the projector case
closed. It clicked. "Okay." Without looking up, he turned for the door.
Kid put his thumb between his own logs and hooked his genitals
forward against his pants. "Hey, turn around."
Denny turned.
"And smile."
Denny laughed, and then tried to stop the laughter. Shaking his
head, he said. "You're real crazy." Then he went out.
"Jesus Christ!' Thirteen pushed in around the boy. "Hey, irs the
Kid!» He turned and repeated to Smokey, like an after-image at his
shoulder: "It's tho: Kid, Hey, Kid,. they told me you were around here>
but 1 thought you split already. How you doing?"
Kid nodded. The dOQr closed behind them. There isn't room in this
kitchen for an these people, Kid thought.
410 Dha!grert
"Glad to see yout" Thirteen nodded back. "Before you cut out. I
mean ... " He held the strap of his tank top from his shoulder. " ... you
cutting out?"
"I don't knOw. in
"I mean, you stay as long as you want. Thaes fine with me. They gOt
all those God-damn freaks in here, I'm really glad to have somebody
like you, you know?"
"Thanks," Kid said and wondered what Thirteen wanted.
."Um ... " Thirteen said,obviously uncomfortable. "Um •.• somebody told me you been fuckin' around with the kids, huh?"
"Huh?lI
"I mean, somebody heard you guys going at it in the loft. You
know?" Thirteen grinned; and still looked uncomfortable. "I mean,
how old are they; fifteen? Sixteen? 1 mean, I just sort of feel responsible for them, because they're not that old, you know?"
"I wasn't fucking with them. They were fucking with me."
"Yeah," Thirteen said and nodded. "They're too much, huh? I mean,
1 don't care what you do, man. It's not a moral thing." Suddenly he
.reached behind him and drew Smokey up under his arm. "I mean,
Smokey here is, what are you, honey? Eighteen? And 1 mean, seventeen,
eighteen, there ain't that much
difference. I just dolt t wanl to see anybody hurt them, all."
"I'm not out to hurt anybody."
"Yeah, man. Sure." Thirteen nodded deeply. "I didn't think you were.
It's JUSt that, well ..• some people have, that's aU. Come on inside, hey;
and smoke some dope with me, hey? I mean, if you feel like it."
Kid let his caged hand fall to the side. "r mean, maybe later, then, if you want to." Thirteen grinned again.
"It's good you ... don't want anybody to get hurt."
Thirteen hesitated. "Thanks." Then he pulled Smokey a little closer, and they walked around Kid into the other room, while somebody
outside the door said:
"Hello ... 1"
She and her shadoW on the screening were out of register.
"Kid? That Is you ..• ?"
The door opened-she and his memory of her were, too.
She watched him with small things happening at her mouth that
could have been preparation for either laughter or recrimination; and
other small things happening in her green eyes.
"Oh, hey-I" he said anyway; because something was warming in
Creatures of Light and Darkness 411
his chest. It roseto heat his face, left him grinning and squinting. "Hey;
Fm glad you ... " His arms went out. She and his memory of her (the
screen door clacked) came together between them. Her cheek butted
against his, her laughter roared happily at his ear. "Oh, hey, I'm glad
you came!" His arms had whipped across her back-one slightly out
(and quivering for wanting to close) for the orchid.
She leaned away; "You sure?" and kissed him. "I'm glad too."
He kissed her-harder, longer, 10siBg himself in it (as his hand
hung, lost in air and metal; he bunched his fingers, loosened them) till
he felt the thing in her shirt pocket, cutting.
He pulled back: Next to her harmonica was his pen.
She said, because she saw him looking, "The bartender at Teddy's
told me to give it to you. He said you dropped it there-' and then he
kissed her (it still cut) again; but he held OB.
She pulled away, once mote, wrinkling her nose. "SomethiBg smells
good." Looking around, she went to the living-room door-he followed-leaned through with one hand on the white frame. "Hey;
Nightmare-is there aBY more of that coffee?"
"You waBt some, sweetheart?" which was from Dragon Lady. "Help
yourself."
Kid watched her cross the room, leaned back on the frame.
She squatted to fill a cup-looked in it first; someone must have
used it, but she shrugged-from the eBamel pot. Once she glanced
back at him, pushed hair from her forehead, grinned. She piCked up
the cup and returned. The inside him still grew.
On the couch, Denny's girl and Copperhead Were going through
some sort of toasting game, clicking brims and laughing.
Nightmare was saying, "I can't hang around this place all day! Hey;
Dragon Lady; you gonna come with me? I mean I caB't hang around-"
A woman stuck two brown arms from under a blanket, with quivering fists, waking.
Dragon Lady and Adam were whispering about something, dark
brown and light b<own heads together. Adam rubbed his chains.
Suddenly Baby came up. Among the faint fuzz of a new mustache,
his nOse had run all over his upper lip. Clutched in scrawny, filthynailed fingers was a cut-glass bowl, caked at the edges with sugar. 'You
want some?" He gestured with his chin toward the tablespoon handle.
"No thanks," Lanya said.
Kid shook his head too. Baby said, 'Oh," and went away.
Lanya held up the cup for Kid to sip. His hands came up to guide
412 Dhalgren
hers. A blade ,ticked crock, so he took that one away, felt the ligaments in the back of her band with the other.
. Coffee slapped bitter back across his tongue; he swallowed. Steam
tickled his nostrils.
She blew; she sipped; she said, "It's stro!'gl"
"Hey, Babyl Wait-come on back here, Adami" Dragon lady
bawled, tUflling, jangling. 'Come on, nowl" .
Through some door, not the kitchen's, a lot of people came mto the
house.
Lanya frowned, blinked. .
A lot of people came into the room. Coffee, chocolate, andtamanndo
faces, hands, and shoulders swung by, tuflling, as chains from long or
stocky necks swung under several hairdos of beach ball dimensions.
Two of the men were arguing, while a third, his arm supple as a blacksnake, waved and shouted to quell them: 'Com'on, manl Come on,
now, manl Come 00-" A minimal half-dozen white faces were occluded Or eclipsed Kid could fu< them. Most, blacks and others,
Kid recognized from the Emboriky run. A dark mahogany guy in a
black vinyl vest stopped by the cOlich to regale Copperhead, while a
diffident white, vestless and a scorpion only from the chains (his belly
and chest were SClII'red with a Single, long pucker, still-scabbed and
pink), stood by, waiting to speak. In trio, oddly
The black in the vinyl was the one who d been frIendly to hun m
Denny's group in the department store.
A hand the color of an old tire suddenly landed on lanya's shoulder,
another on Kid's; the close-cropped head bobbed between them; the
long black body, under the swinging vest flaps and hanging chain
loops, was sour with sweat, the breath,over small teeth and a heavy,
hanging lip, sour with wine. ·Shit ... " drawled in two syllables.
"Hey, Ripper," Lanya said, "get off/" Kid was surprised she knew his
But RIpper-yes, it was Jack the Ripper-got off.
A stacky white girl with a tattooed ann was talking to Nightmare
when twa more blacks joined the colloquy, loudly. Nightmare, louder,
cut over: "Man,l ca,rthang aroltll(i-"
"Come on," Kid said to lanya. "1 want to talk to you."
l..llnya's eyes flicked from the room to Kid's face. "All right."
He gestured with his head for her to follow.
Stepping around one person and over another, they went intO the
hall.
Creatures of Light and Da,kness 413
The noise erupted and trundled and careered.
Looking for the room with Denny's loft, Kid pushed open the second door he saw. But there was too much lightSiam, on aerate by the gieen sink, said, "Heyl" and put the newspaper over his lap. He looked at Kid with a smile that fell apart into
awed "I was ... was reading the paper." At the edge of the
handage over hIS hand, the .£Iesh was scaling. Siam offered his brown
smile again, thought better, took it hack. "JUSt reading the paper." He
stood; the paper fell on the .£Ioor. The boards had once been painted
maroon.
There was neither glass nor screening in the wide porch window.
the city sloped away down the hill.
'You can see ... so far," lanya said at Kid's shoulder. She took another sip of coffee. "I didn't realize you could see so far from here."
But Kid was frowning. "What's Ihal?"
. Beyond the last houses, beyond the moiled grey itself, at a place that
Illlght have marked the hOrizon, a low, luminous arc burned.
"It looks like the sun coming up," unya said.
"Naw,· Siam said. "It's the middle of the afteflloon. Maybe it's ... "
He looked at Kid again, stopped.
"Maybe it's afire," Kid said. "It's too wide for Ihe sun."
Siam squinted. The arc was reddish. Beyond the gash of the park, a
few houses were tOUChed here and there with a copper Ihat, in the
haze, paled almosl to while gold. "Sometimes,' Siam said, 'when you
see the moon real close 10 the horizon, like that, it looks much bigger.
Maybe the same. thing happens to the sun, sometimes?"
"But you just said it was the middle of the afternoon." Kid squinted too. "Besides, it's still ten times too wide." He looked back at Lanya.
"Let's go.·
"Okay." Lanya took his hand, the bladed one, slipping her fingers
between ,the metal, to hold two of his.
They went back into the hall.
The room with Denny's loft didn't have a door.
"If there's nobody in here," Kid said, 'we can talk."
"Want any more coffee?"
"No,"
She.fmished half the cup (while he thought how hot it must be) and
put it down on a cluttered ironing board behind the motorcycle.
"Get up in the loft."
She c1imbed,looked back. "Nobody's up here."
'1-1'1- Dhalgren
"Go on..t!
She crawled over, first one tennis shoe, then the other disappearing.
He came up after her.
"Look," she said, as he got his other knee over, "I came by because
1 wanted to apologize for being so-well, you knOw. Running off like
that. And act.ing so angry."
"Oh," he said. okay. You wm angry. I'mjust glad Y01rcame."
One fist balled on the blankets, he settled to his hallllches. watching her
silhouette against the window shade. "How did yol;llmow 1 was herer
He wanted to put his head in her lap; he wanted to nuzzle between her
legs. "How did you find me, this time? Who saw me wander up here
this morning and came running back to tell you?"
"But this is where they said you'd been for-"
"I know!" He sat back, laughed sharply. "rve been gone another five
days! Right?"
Her silhouette fr9wned,
"Or sil<;o Or ten .•. people have been talking about me again, saying how I've been living it up here, running with the scorpions, making my rep." He wanted to cup her warm cheeks in his rough, ugly
hands. He said, and his voice suddenly became rough, ugly: "I've seen
you every day since I met Yol,l .•. " He dragged his hands, bladed and
unbladed, into his lap, where bone and muscle and chain and leather
and nerve and metal, aU mixed up, lay, heavy and confused and gripping. "I have'" he said, swallowed. "Thafs what itJee1s like. To me ••• "
She said: "That's one of the things 1 wanted to talk about. I mean,
after I left you asleep, in the church, 1 thought maybe you'd want to
know some of what happened while you ... were away. You told me
you went looking fat me at the park commune, I thought you'd want
to know what happened there after that guy with the gun-"
'1-" fingers and metal and harness moved in his lap-"I don't ...
I mean, I live in one city." He moved but couldn't lift. "Maybe you live
in another. In mine, time ... leaks; sloshes backwards and forwards,
turns up and shows what's on its ••• underside. Thlngs shift. Yeah,
maybe you could explain. In yow city. In yout city, you're sane and I'm
crazy. But in mine, you're the one who's nuts! Because. you keep telling
me things are happening that don't fit with what I see! Maybe that's the
only city 1 can live in, Some guywith a gun? In the park?" He lalilghed,
harshly. "l don't know if! want to live in yours!"
She. was silent; once he saw her head jerk at some idea; bllt she decided not to say that one, seconds latet decided to say another: "You
Creatures oj Light and Darkness 415
say you saw me ... last night, aUhe church? And then before that, yesterday ... morning? In the park? All right. I'll accept that's what it
looks like to you, if you'll accept it doesn't seem that way to me.
All right." She gestured toward his knee, did not quite touch it. "I'm
curious about your ... city. But some time soon, ask me about what
goes on in mine. Maybe something's there that can help you."
"You have my notebook?"
"Yes." She smiled. "I figured you were so out of it, you just might
leave it behind on the floor. You've written Some strange stuff in there."
"My poems?"
"Those too,lJ she said.
Which made him frown because some of this warmth, still unresolved, was connected with wanting to write.
"I'm glad you have it. And I'm glad you came to see me. Because 1-"
Footsteps below.
And Denny's head came up over the loft edge. "Hey, look. This isoh. You.' Denny crawled up over while someone else climbed.
She stopped with her head just visible, and recognized Kid with a
frown that faded to resignation, then climbed the rest of the way,
breasts swinging in blue jersey.
"Urn ... this loft is theirs," Kid said to umya.
"It's his," the girl said. "It isn't mine. All the junk up here is his. We
just came to get away from the mob."
"You see," Kid said, "instead of telling me whau. been going on while
I was there, you should be finding Out what's been going on here."
"Sure, n Lanya said. "What?"
"I been balling these two, for one thing. That seemed like days ... "
Denny's chin jerked.
The girl Sighed a little.
"Denny'S a good fuck," Kid said. "She is too. But sometimes it gets
a little heclic."
"Denny ... ?" the girl said.
Denny, sitting back on his heels, darted his eyes from umya to Kid.
"Maybe," Kid said, and suddenly his hands came apart, "we all conld
ball again. 1 mean the Jour of us. That might work out better ...... "
The girl said, "Denny, I'm supposed to be going some place with
Copperhead and his friends. I told you that before. Look I gotta ... "
"Oh," Denny said. "Well, okay."
'You sure?" Kid asked the girl. "I mean, the whole idea was because
I thought maybe it would make you feel better if ... "
416 Dhalgren
The girl poised at the edge of the loft. "lOok; she said. "You're prob·
ably trying ta be very nice. But you 31'st don't understand. It isn't my
thing. his." She nodded toward Denay. "I don't know •.. is
it yours?" That was to Lanya.
"I don't know," Lallya said. "I've llever tried."
"I don't mi<td somebody watch-ing," the girl said, "if it's a friend.
But what we were doing," she shrugged; "It isn't me." She got down
from the platform, paused again, just a head showtng. "Denny, I'll see
you later. Goad-bye," with the same tone Kid remembered from the
sixteenth-floor apartment in the Labrys. A second later she tripped on
something, gave a startled, stifled, "Shit ... " and was gone.
Kid looked from Denny to LaDya, back to Denny. "We ... " he started. "We were just ... we figured we'd lIse your loft because, well, there
were so many other people arounQ. Like she said; the mob."
"That's okay," Denny said. He crossed his arms· "Is it okay if 1 watch?"
Lanya laughed and sat back against the wtndow edge. A scar of light
from beside the shade lay on her hair.
Denny looked at her. "That's what I like to do. Sometimes, I mean,
since its my place. He knows."
"Sure," Lanya said. reasonable." She nodded, laughed again.
"We were just using it CO talk," Kid said.
"Oh," Denny said. "r just thought because you were saying We
should all ... you knOw. All of us.'
'You do live in a strange city." Lanya said. "Maybe I do too." She
looked at Denny. "Where QO you live?"
"Right here." Denny frowned. "Most of the time."
"Oh." After a moment, Lanya said: "You two've been at it? Why
don't you two make it then-" she moved her tennis shoes from beneath her, raised her knees, dropped her meshed fists between-"and
I'll watch. I've been in the othenootn when two guys were balling. But
I've never been in the same bed. The Idea sort of turns me on."
Kid said: "ljustmeant-"
"rknow," Lanya said. "YO\! want Dennyand me to ball, and you want
to watch. Well-" she shrugged, tosseclherh<til:andgrinned-"lthink
you're cute-" at Denny. "I wouldn't mind that."
"Gee," Delmy said, AI don't know 1£ .... and shifted into some other
emotional gear: "because you see we were .• ." and into another: "before. It was okay. But .. ." He Went forward on his fists, loweled hiS haunches. just that it WlISn't her .... He glanced over the
edge. Alike she said. And I'd never done It thClt way eiUter:"
Creatures of Light and Darkness 417
"Oh.· Lanya said, pushing het elbows together.
Kid thought: I still don't know her name. "Hey," he said to Lanya .
• Come here. n
Lanya pursed her lips, hesitated with stiffened arms; then they unstiffened. She came forward.
"You too, motherfucker." Denny practically fell against his side. Kid
caugh t the boys neck in the crook of his arm. The blades swung beyond Dennys face, dim in half light. Kid pulled his arm tight around
l.Jmya's shoulder, his hand an epaulet over blouse, collar bone, muscle.
"If you don't play, you don't watch.'
He had been planning to squeeze them affectionately, maybe say
something else funny, and let go. But, for a moment, he was aware they
were two entirely different temperatures; and something in his own
h8lltwas defined, resolved, released. And Denny (his shoulder hot and
sill! pOWdery dry) reached across Kid's chest, put two fingers against
Lanya'S cheek (her neck against Kids arm cooler and softer, as though
it had been recently dried after rain) and said, "You're ... " and stopped
when she reached out and put her palm on Denny's neck. Kid said:
'Yeaa .... She watched, something happening in her lace, which became quiet laughter, her eyes going back and forth between Kid's and
Denny's, pulling herself closer.
Dennys head suddenly moved. His laugh back was sharp, shrill.
Still, whatever tensions Were in it eased in it.
"You open your mouth after this morning, cocksucker," Kid said,
"and it won't be my dick you get in it_·
"Kid ... !. Lanya's protest was real.
But Denny caught Lanya's forearm, turned his face into her palm.
Something in the machinery between Kids belly and loin tightened.
Dennywas trying to climb over him. Kid moved a leg between themsomething scraped. Lanya got one elbow under her. Kids hand dragged
her back. It's clumsy, Kid thought. It is clumsy! and a despair that he
had been tlying to hold in. suspension long? broke. He
thought he was going to cry. What came out was a great, voiceless gasp.
Denny lay his head down on Lanya's hand that was on Kids chest.
'then he said, sofdy, • Aren't We gonna take our clothes off ... this
tim.7"
Lanya moved her other hand down Denny's head till she was holding
his car.
"Don't pull," Denny said.
"I'm nOt pulling," she said. "I'm tickling."
418 Dhalgren
"Oho" Denny said. And then: "That's nice." And then, raising his
head, "\ think you better take that thing olf-at leas!."
(Kid looked at his hand still in the air. It was quieter in the other
room.)
unya suddenly sat. "Oh wow. Sure.· She wore one of her stranger
expressions. "I didn't even seeLu
Kneeling over him, she took Kids wrist, got the clasp. Kid was completely astonished when Dennys hands Joined hers and, with no
clumsLness, the blades opened, Cell .. way: the harness was lifted from
his iingling wrist.
unya put it on the window ledge by the blind, where it stood, upright,. a long, bright crown.
Kid turned his freed hand in the air, 100kiJ1g at the hirsute joints and
ruined tips flex, horny palms and knuckles folding, opening, till,tired,
it began to waver, fall. Someone tugged at his belt. Someone pulled at
his vest shoulder. He laughed, turning, while through some door in another room a lot of people left.
They made love.
It was energetic. It was graceful. It was intense. He was a warmth
that moved around and between them. They were warmths that moved
around him, between him and each other. OlLce, eyes closed against
the damp blanket, he moved his hand across her rib cage, brushing
beneath her breasts with the knuckle of his thumb (she caught her
breath ... ) till he reached her arm (. .. then let it out) and followed
her arm to where her elbow bent on Dennys beUy, and on to where her
hand held Dennys penis.
After moments, his hand came away, against the embankment ofher
hip, crossed it. He pressed his fingertips in the over her pubic
bone, slid them down to cup, to press in. First one, then the other, he
touched their genitals. Finally he pushed himself to his knees, put one
knee across them, watched them watch him, blinked. Sweat dribbled
hjS cheek. A drop caught in his eyelash and shook. He bent his head.
Is it only an hour, he wondered, that encompassed ,three people's four
orgasms? Now I know why, though foreplay can be delineated in all its
Cascinating and psychotropic detail. It poet must use asterisks or blank
paper for orgasmic mechanics that satisfYing: they open to something
so wide you can now understand why, when sex is that good, you may
say, "The sex is not the most important part," and reel these words analog some shadow of truth.
Creatures of Light and Darhness 419
Then he remembered, amidst his auto-pontifications, there were two
other people who would have to agree with him before he could even
suspect such meanderings correct. Grinning, he pushed np on his
hands, climbed over one of them (stopped to stare at the sleeping face,
full up, lips momentarily pressing, nostrils flaring, two fingers coming
to scratch the nose and fall.away, still in sleep), looked over at ,the other
(this one on the side, lips parted, lower eyelid mashed slightly open
revealing an albumen line, breath whispering against curled knuckles)
and, after takiog the pen from Uinyas pocket and putting it in a buttonhole of his vest, climbed down, draggiog his clothes on top of him.
He wondered, if they woke, would they think he had gone to the
bathroom.
In the doorway, he pulled on his pants, put on his vest. There was
a cold line against his chest ... The pen. The chain around him was
hot. He ran his fingertips along it, concerned and tryiog to recall why.
In the strangely quiet hall, he went to the porch door, opened it.
And sqUinted. Gold trapezoids lay high up the lapped-plank wall. His
moist skin was slathered with bronze. Each hair on his forearm glowed
amber.
He heard his own loud breath; he closed his mouth.
Looking down at his chest, before his vision blurred with tears, he
saw that one prism had laid out on his skin a tiny chain of color.
The house was perfectly silent behind him.
He rubbed his eyes, shook his head. .
The tearing stopped, anyway.
He raised his eyes again, looked out the porch wiodow at the horizORagainWhen he'd first moved to New York City to go to Columbia, he had
brought with him an absolute panic of the Bomb. It had been October;
he had no Thursday morning classes, was still half-asleep in the sweaty
sheets ob persistent,Indian Summer. Sirens woke him-he remembered
no scheduled test. A jet snarled somewhere on the sky. He got chills and
immediately tried to lOgiC them away. Ibis is the sort of coiocidence, he
thought, blinking at the dull wiodow, that can ruio a good day.
then the window filled with blioding yellow light.
He'd leaped from the bed, taking the sheets with him. His throat
cramped and his heart exploded while he watched gold fire spill window to window down the tenement across the street.
The fireball! he thought, beyond the pain in his terrified body. The
lightS here now. The shock and the; sound will arrive in four seconds,
five seconds and I will be dead ...
420 Dhalgrrn
Four seconds, five seconds, seven seconds, ten seconds later, he was
still standing there, shaking, panting, trying to think of someplace to
hide.
The clouds, in coincidence compounded, had pulled away from the
sun. The plane was gone. The dock radio in the bookshelf said noon.
The siren lowered its pitch, softened its whine, and ceased.
What he'd felt then had been active terror.
What he felt now was its passive equivalent.
It couldn't be a £ireball, he thought. That was impossible.
Beyond the mist, it shone through as moon or sun shone through
an even veil of clouds. It was Ihe color of the sunrise: Perhaps a sixth
of the circle had risen, secanted by the horizon. But already it was,
what? A hundred? Three hundred? Six hundred times the area of the
platinum poker chip he remembered as the sun.
... If the sun went naval he thought. Between his loudening heart
he ferreted this information: If thars what it was, then the earth would
boil away in seconds! His heart stilled. What a silly fact to base one's
confidence on before this light!
The clouds over half the sky were a holocaust of pewter and pale gold.
Was the light warm?
He rubbed his bronzed forearm.
The verdigrised spigot on the wall dropped molten splashes on the
muddy drain. Torn paper tacked to the frame of the window filigreed
a shadow on the wall beside him.
When he had thought the bomb had fallen, back in New York, he
had been left with a tremendous energy, had paced and pondered and
searched for something to do with it, had ended up just walking it away.
1 may be dead, he thought, in . . . seconds, minutes, hours? He
squinted at the brilliant arc, already perhaps thirty houses wide. The
thought came with absurd coolness, I'm going to write something.
He sat quickly on the floor (despite callous, he noticed again it was
so much easier to distingoish textures in the gritty boards with the foot
he kept bare than the one he wore booted), pulled the paper Siam had
left up from the top of the crate. (His pants pulled across the place he'd
scraped his knee climbing into the loft.) The TImes was often sloppily
laid out with frequent white spaces. Paging through, he saw one, and
pulled his pen out of his vest.
1 had a mother, I had a father. Now I don't remember their names.
1 don't remember mine. In another room, two people are sleeping who
are nearer to me by how many years and thousands of miles; for whom,
in this terrifying light, I would almost admit love.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 421
He opened Ihe pages back and placed the paper on the crate. The
pages were yellow in the new light.
And it was not blank space.
The bottom quarter was boxed for an advertisement. Inside, twoinch letters announced:
BRASS
ORCHIDS
In smaller, italic type beside the title, set off in quotation marks,
were lines of verse.
He mouthed: •... at this incense ... ' and balked. He threw back
at.the chills on his neck (and closed his eyes against the light:
mslde: his hds was the color of orange rind), opened his eyes to· look at
the paper. A misreading: •... this incidence ... ' He let his breath out.
Why had they ,taken those lines, he wondered. Without the two before or the one after, they meant ... nothing? He puzzled on the severed image, clicking his pen point.
What was the purpose of it?
(What had he wanted to write?)
His forehead moistened; his eye drifted to the column of type down
the left of the ... advertisement; and snagged on •... Newboy ... n He
went to the top, to shake loose the confusion:
We have lost our poet in residence: To be precise, at Six-thirty. after
a farewell breakfast prepared by Mrs Alt-Professor Wellman, Mr
and Mrs Green, Thelma Brandt, Colonel Harris, Roxanne and
Tobie Fischer were among the guests who rose in time. Mter a
rushed (alas) second cup of coffee, our driver, Nick Pedaikis arrived from Wells Cottage to drive Ernest Newboy to
Helmsford.
A moving incident at the regretted departure: a young man
whom Mr Newboy had been encouraging with his poetry came
to wave an admiring farewell at the mouth of Bellona's own Pons
Asonorum. So, another celebrity leaves, loved. But Bellona, it
would seem, in all its impoverishment, holds myriad fascinations.
. We had heard rumors of the coming of our most recent guest;
still we had, frankly, entertained some doubts as to whether !his
visit would, as it were, come off. Communication with the outside
world, as all of you know who have tried it, is an exhausting, inaccurate, and frustrating business here at best. How convenient!
422 Dhalgren
In the same trip with which our Nick delivered Mr Newboy onto
his journey to Pittsblain, he was able to meet, as per tentative
arrangements, with Captain Michael Kamp. They arrived in Bellona shortly after three o'clock. Captain Kamp is indefinite about
the length of his stay. We cannot express what a privilege it is to
have this illustrious gentleman with us in
Incense had come as a misreading of incidence; did illustrious echo
illusion? Kid wondered.
He raised his eyes to the bright vista, squinted, and thought: The
problem of hallucinating red eyes, even a great red one rising into the
sky ...
The thought came with a load of monstrous comfort: this is impossible. He stopped clicking his pen. Momentarily he wanted to laugh.
Hallucination?
He ga<:ed into the light, tried to open his eyes full to it; they hurt
and refused.
He had wanted to write something?
This wasn't even hallucination. I'm probably lying in bed, somewhere, with my eyes closed ... is that called dreaming?
After-images deviled the walls.
He turned his head away, and into darkness ... dreaming?
His cheek was on a blanket. One arm was cramped beneath his side.
He was filled with the tingling one has after having laughed a long
time. He lay, trying to remember what had just passed, gnawing at his
fingers till he tasted blood. And kept gnawiog.
tanya shifted, made Some slow; sleepy sound.
Kid took his hand from his mouth, curled his fingertips tight against
his palm. "Hey," he said. "Are you asleep ..• ?"
u.nya stretched. "More or less . .. " She lowered her chin and looked
down at the blond head between their hips. "What was his name?"
Kid laughed.
Denny's hand uncurled on Kid's thigh. Then the blond head came
up." ... huh?"
"What's your name?" She pushed back cords of his hair.
Denny:S lids slid closed. He sighed without answering and lay down
again.
Kid held his laughter in this time.
Lanya shook her head, her hand at Kid's forehead pUshing at his
coarser hair.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 423
"How was he?" he whispered, from somewhere down in his chest.
"Mmmmr:.
"I heaTd you two when I was sort of half-asleep." He cupped heT
cheek and she turned to lip the ham of his thumb. "How'd he do?"
She turned back. A smile and a frown mixed themselves on heT face.
"Now which one of you was that-' She laughed when he shook her
ear. "Very sweet and very energetic." She glanced down again. "Sort of
•.• up and down, you know? He's got quite a sense of humor."
"That's one name for it." .
Her eyes came up again; even in the shadow their green was bright
between his fmgets barring her face.
"Terribly, terribly sweet, mainly."
"And how are you?"
"Mmmmm." She closed her eyes and smiled.
"You know what he did this morning?'
"What?'
"Hedragged me in here and said he was going to blow me, and then
he got that girl in here."
She opened her eyes. "Oh, is that how it happened.' He felt her eyebrows lift. "Well, I guess turn about is fair play.'
"I dig that scene-'
"So I noticed.. You1re sweet too."
"-but she was sort of funny about the whole thing. I didn't like it,
I mean with her."
"So I gathered. Also he's a little boy, isn't he? Or is he another baby
face like you?"
"He's fifteen. She's seventeen. I think."
Lanya sighed. "Then perhaps you just have to give them time to
grow into their own perversions. And by the way, how are you I"
"Fine.' Kid grinned. "I'm really fine.'
And laughing, she pnshed her face toward his.
Hands scrabbled on Kids belly; Denny grunted.
An elbow hit Kids stomach. A knee hit his knee.
"Hey, watch it," Lanya said.
"I'm sorry,· Denny said, and fell on top of them.
The scent of Denny's breath, which was piney, joined Lanya's, which
reminded Kid of ferns.
"Oof," lanya said. "Would you please tell me what your name is?"
"Denny," Denny said loudly jn Kid's ear. "What's yours?"
"Lanya Colson."
424 Dhalgren
"You're ,rhe KidS old lady, huh?"
"When he remembers who lam." Her hand on Kid's wrist squeezed.
Kid rubbed the back of Denny's neck with one hand and held
Larryas with the other. Again he felt how chalky Denny's skin was.
Lanya was warm.
"You like this?"
Lanya laughed and moved her arms farther around Denny's back.
"Up here, where 1 live. " Denny suddenly pulled back. "You like
this?ll
They watched him hunker on the blankets. The side of Kid's thigh
on hers was warm. The top, where Denny had been, cooled.
"You can't stand up," Lanya said. "But it must be good for sitting
and thinking."
"I stay up here a lot," Denny said. "'Cause it never gets that hot.
Then sometimes I don't come up here two or three days." Suddenly he
sat back and pulled plastic envelope into his lap. "You like this?"
"What is it?" Lanya asked and leaned forward.
"It's a shirt. " Denny said. "It's a real pretty shirt.»
Kid looked too.
Beneath the plastic cover, and over green satin, gold strings tangled:
the fringe was attached to the velveteen yoke. Velveteen cuffs sported
gilt and green glass links.
"I found it in a store." Denny reached behind him. "And this one."
Silver thread elaborately embossed the black.
"Those were the two 1 liked," Denny explained. "Only you can't
wear stuff like this around here. Maybe if I go someplace else ... " He
looked between the two qUickly.
Kid scratched the hair between his legs and drew away a little.
Lanya had leaned closer. "They are pretty!"
"What is that one made on" Kid asked.
ianya pressed the plastic covering with he. palm. "Its crepe.'
• And I have these." Denny pushed the shirts behind him. ·See."
When the lid clicked off the plastiC box, the cubes inSide bounced.
"It's a game," Denny explained. "I found it in another store. res too
complicated for me to play, and thereS nobody here to play it with. But
I Hked the colors.'
Lanya picked up one of the green blocks. On each face was an embossed gold letter: p, 'I, T, S,O, i ...
Denny blinked and held the box open for her to replace the playingpiece.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 425
She turned it in her fingers a long time, till Kid's awareness of
Dennys restrained impatience made him uncomfortable.
"Put it back, " Kid said, quietly.
She did, quickly.
"And this." Denny pulled out an oversized paperback book. "You
got to look at those close. They're very funny pictures-"
"Escher!" Lanya exclaimed. "They certainly are."
Kid reached over her arm to turn the page.
"Where did you get those?" Lanya asked.
"In another ... store." (Kid wondered idly at the hesitation but didn't
wok up.) "In somebody's house," Denny corrected himself. "We broke
in. This was there, so I took it. You seen 'em before, ain't you. 11
"Um-hm." Lanya nodded.
Kid turned another page of etched perspective imploded on itself
and put back together inSide out. wmya bent to look now.
"This!" Denny said.
They both looked. And Kid took the book from lanya and handed
it back to Denny. ("thalS all right," Denny said. "She can look at it,"
ignoring Kid's gesture.) He showed them a silver box. "Ain't this a neat
radio? It's got AM and FM and it even says Short Wave." It was the size
of a bolt of kitchen matches. "And all sorts of other dials."
"I wonder if they do anything,' Lanya said.
"That one says the 'volume'," Denny explained. 'The button's there,
that one is theAFC thing so it doesn't slide around. But you can't tell
around here because radios don't work here any more. n
"Like the shirts," she said. "When you go someplace else, you'll
have something nice . .II
"If we go someplace else," Denny considered, "I'll probably leave all
this stuff here. You can get lots of nice things anywhere around. You
just pick it up. n
"1 meant somewhere outside the ... ' Kid watched her realize that
Denny had not. .
Suddenly she touched the radio;, "It isn't she announced.
The black and metal boor was trapezoidal. She flattened her hands to
the sides of it. "It is beautiful," she said in the voice of someone admitting that a puzzle was stUI inSoluble. (What was the name of his
roommate in Delaware who had had so much trouble with the paper
on mathematical induction? Another thing he couldn't remember ...
and was sad at his ruined memory and happy for Lanya.) "It really
is ... just lovely.'
426 Dhalgren
Kid leaned close to her and kneaded the inside of his thighs. He'd
laid the Escher against his calf. The comer of the book nicked; he didn't
move it.
"You seen these pictures roo?" Denny brought out another papercovered book.
Lanya said: "Let me see."
She turned over the first page and frowned.
" ... Um, did Boucherever paint religious pictures?" Kid ventured.
"Not," Lanya said, "for three-dimensional, laminated-plastic dioramas."
"I thillk 3.D pictures are great," Denny said, while Kid felt vaguely
embarrassed.
"These are strange." Lanya turned another page.
A crowned woman in blue stood one foot on a crescent moon while
below her two naked men cowered in a rowboat. Ghosts of the same
picture at other angles haunted the striated plastic.
. "What's the next ... » Lanya asked.
A man who looked like a classical]esus, in a loincloth, limped on a
Single crotch, one hand, with stigma, extended.
"Spanish ... 1" she mused.
"Puerto Rican," Kid suggested.
Lanya glanced at ltim. "It doesn't have any writing anywhere.".
A woman., perhaps the vi<gin, as likely an empress, rode on a tIger.
"The rocks and mOss and water in the background, that'S lifted from
da Vinci." Lanya turned to the next. "These are really ... " She closed
the book to a white cover on which was a crowned and bleedmg heart
behind a cross. "You can't tell me those are Christian. Did you find this
in somebodys house to01 11
"In a store," Denny said. He was hunting at the edge of the blanket
again. "And these." In his cupped hands were three glass cubes set with gLittering
stones.
"Dice?" Kid asked.
"I had four of them," Denny said. "One broke." He rolled them
against Lanya's leg. . .
Three, two, and six: counting the top numbers was diffIcult because
of pips on other faces.
"You're really inno collecting pretty things.« Lanya picked up a cube.
Denny sat back against the wall and hugged his knees.
"Um-hum."
Creatures oj Light and Darhness 427
"Me too." She watched him. "Only I leave them where I find them.
Like buildings. Or trees. Or paintings in museums."
"You just-" Denny let his knees fall open-"notice where they are'
and go back and look at them?" '
She nodded.
Denny tangled his fists in the blanket between his feet.
"But you don't have to do it that way here. You can just take what
!ou want. maybe not the trees and the buildings. But the paintmgs, If you fmd one you like, you just carry it with you. Shit, you can
go live in a fuckin' building if you like it! In front of the [uckin' tree!"
Lanya let her thin back bend. "I'm into collecting pretty, useful objects. Yours are just pretty."
"Huh?1l
"But if they're supposed to stay useful, I have to leave them where
they are."
"You think there's something wrong with taking that stuID"
:No ... of course not. As long as you didn't take itjromso';'ebody."
Well it must have belonged to somebody once."
"Do you think there's something wrong with ,taking it?"
"Shit.· Denny grinned. "Nobody:' gonna catch me. You like taking
stuID"
«Its not_H
"Say," Denny came to his knees. ·You ever hustle?"
" "Huh?" Lanya recovered from her surprise with an unsteady grin.
I beg your pardon."
"I mean rake money for going to bed with somebody."
uNol I certainly havea't. n
"Denny has, I bet,' Kid said.
"Yeah, sure," Denny said. "But I just wanted to knOw. About you."
Her amusement faltered toward curiosity. "Why?"
"Would you?"
"I don't know ... perhaps." She laughed again and took his knee in
her hands. "Are you planning to set me up in business now? There isn' t
any bUSiness here.·
Denny giggled. "That's ROt what I meant.· Suddenly he picked up
the plastic box, opened the lid, tossed.
"Hey!' Lanya shrieked, and scrambled back under the cubes of coloredwood.
Denny picked up a fallen cube and dlIew it at her.
"Oh, cut that out-'"
428 Dhalgren
He threw another one and laughed.
"Damnit-'"'
Scowling, she picked up a handful and flung them back, hard. He
ducked: they clicked the wall.
She hurled another that hit his head.
"Ahh ... '" He flung one back.
She laughed and threw two more, one with the left hand and one
with the right. Both hit. Denny rolled away in hysteriCS and scrambled
after more gaming pieces.
"You're gonna lose the ... " Kid started. "Ihenhe stretched across
the front edge ·of the loft to keep the pieces from rolling over. Denny's
laughter bobbed between octaves. Kid thought, His voice hasn't even
finished changing.
UlUya was laughing too, almost so hard she couldn't throw.
A cube hit Kid's hip. He knocked it back onto the blanket. Another
went over his shoulder, clattering to the floor. He watched ,them turn
and duck and toss and wished they would throw pieces at him. After
a while they did.
He threw them back, tried to guard the edge, gave up, by now laughing himself, till it hurt beneath his sternum, and CQuldn't stop laughing, so hurled the bright cubes with gold p's, q's, K's, and r's.
"It's not fair!" Lanya cried against Kid's arm, then laughed again,
when they had made him abandon the loft edge.
"Just 'cause you throw so hard!" Cube in hand, Denny ducked first
left, then right.
'Come on ... noW ... " Kid panted, and couldn't laugh anymore.
Denny looked over the edge. "There're a lot of them on the floor."
Lanya pulled back, threw another. It deflected from Denny's thigh.
She ducked behind Kid.
Denny glanced back. "There goes another one."
Lanya looked out tentatively. "Maybe we better go down and pick
them up." .
Frowning, Denny turned back for the box. "Yeah ... " He stopped
to place the shirts and books and the glass dice in the comer. Koth regarded the hoard from his day-glo poster.
A shirt casing had gotten tom.
"Let's go down,' Kid said.
Lanya followed him on the ladder.
They picked up cubes. When Denny came down, she threw one at
him as he stepped to the floor.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 429
"Hey, don't-" Denny said,because the cube Went off into the junk
beneath the platform.
"I'm sorry!" Lanya snickered again. "Here, let me help." She followed him into the leaning tools, piled chairs, cartons. She held back
an ironing board while Denny dropped down. "Got it ... '
She came over with the box, and held it for Kid to put in his handful. While he fingered them clumsily into place, she asked, "Have you
ever taken money for having sex with somebody?"
"Yes."
"Men and women?'"'
One cube stuck against another; Kid pressed, and another jumped
Qut of the matrix. men."
"Maybe I should try it," she said after a moment. "Everybody thinks
about it."
"Why? n Kid stopped for another cube by his foot.
"And maybe you've just made a good point. n
When Kid stood to place the cube, she added:
"But that wouldn't stop me."
She snapped the lid and turned toward Denny.
Kid grinned, watching her backbone like an arrow into her buttocks'
heart. I do not know, he thollght, what goes On inside her. All I'm sure
is it's very different from what it looks like is going on.
"There're still some up top." She started up the ladder.
"I don't see any more here." Kid started behind her.
"Hey-!" Denny said.
Then something locked around Kid's neck, scraped his sides, and
hung on.
"Fuck, what the-"
"Carry me!" Denny shouted, clinging. "Go ahead, carry me on up.'
"Fuck you!" Kid shouted, sagging on his grip. He tried to shake the
boy loose. "Don't choke me to death, you stupid ... bastard!" He hauled
up another rung.
Lanya crouched on the ledge. "You'll drop him-"
Kid hauled up one more. "Get on up there, cocksucker! n
Lanya was tugging at Denny:s arm.
Kid tried to heave Denny up.
14Hey_!lI
Kid relt Denny. Slipping. Bare feet pawed his hip. Then something
scrambled over his head. "Hey," Denny repeated in a different voice.
Re tugged at Kid's shoulder. "Are you all right?"
430 Dhalgren
Lanya sat beside him, slapping first her thighs and then her stomach, once more helpless with laughter.
"Fuck you." Kid crouched on the loft edge. As he leaned forward,
something hissed across his chest.
"Hey; my chain! It
'What?" Denny pushed himself backward, pulling the blankets
from the board. He reached, without looking, for his own anklet.
Kid wondered if that was what had scraped So at his side.
Lanya watched, her lips apart.
"My chain," Kid repeated; he turned to sit on the edge of the loft,
and looked down. The end, dangling from his foot, swung inches above
the floor. He reached down to pull it up. "It broke this morning ...
somebody broke it.»
"Who?" Lanya asked.
"Somebody broke it. 1 tried to fix it, but 1 knew it probably wouldn't
hold."
With two fingers he followed it across his shoulder. The break was
at the same link. He pulled the ends together.
"Wait a second," Lanya said. "You don't have any nails. Let me
look." She crouched before Kid, so close her hair tickled his chest. How
can she see, he wondered. "I just about got it."
She did something with her teeth.
"Hey?" Kid said.
"There," and pushed herself backward.
Behind Lanya, Denny asked now, "Who broke it?" Denny lay his
foot on La·nya's knee. He put down the box, and brought his arms
around her stomach, pulled her to him, laid an arm along hers.
"Don't those get in your way?" She glanced over Denny's leg at his
dog-chained ankle. "Sexy; 1 suppose."
"Who?" Denny repeated his question.
"I don't know," Kid said. "I really don't."
He fingered for the weak link. Part ofit was the dimness, hut he
doubted he could find that link nOW even in full light. He tugged, first
here, then there. "You really fixed it?"
I.anya, her shoulder under Denny's chin, bit her lip to retain iaughter. The words" ... in time,» fell through his head, and he was unsure
what they referred to. I've found something, he thought, in time. Who
needs monasteries? He laughed out loud for Lanya's caged humor.
She let go Denny, and picked up the box, looking about her legs to
see if any more pieces had fallen out.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 431
A cube gnawed the side of Kids foot. "Here! "
Lanya recovered herself to hold out the box.
Kid lossed the cube in. She put the box on her thigh to fit the cube
in place.
"You really lhink you're a funny little cocksucker, huh?" Kid stood
up, crouched, moved forward. His head tapped the ceHing. Not hard,
but he staggered. "Yeah?" He crouched again, turning toward Denny
and rubbing his groin. "Look at you. You suck a nice dick. You give
some good head, what do you think that makes you?" Be nudged
I.anya with his elbow. The cubes rattled; she looked up. "Yeah, I like
his tongue up my ass. But you think that makes you anything more
than lukewarm shit-Hey, look at Denny!" Kid pOinted between
Dennys legs. "See, I do like that and he's got a hard-on already." He sat
down and smiled. "Come on, letl; get out of here."
"Now?" Lanya asked.
"Yeah, now! l!
Denny crawled over to look in the box. "We got all the pieces." He
Sighed.
"Um-hm," she said qUietly, and closed the lid.
Dennyput the box in the comer. Kid pulled out his vest and putit on.
I.anya sat cross-legged in the middle of the bed. Kid could not decide if her expression were pensive or absent. "Corne on." He tossed
her blouse, and did not wait ,to see what she did with it, but reached
for his pants.
"Did everybody leave the house?" Lanya asked.
"It sure is quiet. II Denny said.
Kid looked back.
Lanya pushed another button through its hole. The blouse tails lay
a-tangle in her lap.
Denny stooped listening, his cock, finally, lowering.
"I'm hungry," Kid said "I haven't done anything but fuck for twentyfour hours: you, him, his girlfriend-"
"You're a busy-' Lanya pulled on her jeans-"son of a bitch."
"Huh?lI
"Nothing."
"-him, then you again." The two hooks came through the belt.
"Jesus!" He looked up.
Denny said: "It sure is quiet. Maybe everybody went out."
"That'd be nice,' Lanya said.
"Do you guys keep food in the house?" Kid asked.
432 Dha!gren
"Not very long." Denny tossed Kid his projector.
Lanya started down first. She held the laces of her tennis in
her teeth. "I can't carry them and climb too," she had to say three Urnes
before they understood.
While Denny dropped over the edge, Kid turned to get the orchid.
The light around the window shade was neon orange. As he
up the clustered blades, red gleamings poured down the edges. KId
frowned and backed to the ladder.
In ,the hallway, Lanya asked, "Has the smoke cleared up outside?"
The window in the hall door was filled with light like bloody sunrise.
"I guess they all have gone out.' Denny looked in another room.
"Do you think maybe it is clearing aID" Lanya asked. "LetS go out·
side and see.'
Kid followed them to ,the front door.
Lanya opened it and went down the steps. "There're still c.louds all
over the sky.' She reached the sidewalk, turned around, lookmg upand screamed.
While Kid and Denny hurried down, the screaming lost voice and
became just expelled air.
On the sidewalk, they turned to look up in the direction she stared:
From the edge of the sidewalk, three-quarters of the disk was visible above the houses. The clouds dulled it enough to squint at, but it
went up, covering the roofs, and up, and up, and up. What they coul.d
see of it filled half the visible sky. And, Kid realized, hali of the sky tS
huge! But that fell away into impossibility. Or unverifiability, anyway.
The rim was a broil of gold. Everything was like burning metal.
Lanya pressed his shoulder, gasping.
Denny was saying, "Huh . .. ?" and taking a step backward, and
saying, "Huh . .. ?" again. He backed into Kid. His head snapped
around, and the expression (the sockets of his eyes were cups of
molten brass spilling down his cheeks) was maniacal. "Hey, that's really
... something, ainJt it?" The question was not rhetorical. it
something?" He turned to squint again.
"What is it?" Lanya whispered.
"It's the sun," Kid said. "Don't you see, it's just the sun."
"My God we'refalling into it ... " Lanya caught her breath, released
it, then began to cry.
"Aw, come onl" Kid said. "Cut it out, willyou-"
"My God ... " she whispered and looked again.
He watched her faee,open and glistening and shaking.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 433
"Is it dangerous?" Denny Whispered. arm scared as a motherfucker!'
"It's getting bigger!" umya shrieked, turned, and crouched with her
hands against the side of her face.
"No, it's notl n Kid said. l';At least not fast enough to see! Hey. come
on!" He hit at her shoulder.
The orchid swung from the chain on his chest, tickling and glittering. It isn't a dream, Kid thought. 1 was dreaming already. It isu't a
dream; that would make it ... Bands of muscle made his throat so tight
it hurt. "Heyl" He pOlmded his fist on Dennys back. "Hey, are you
okay?"
Eyes wide, and chest all filled up with air, Denny got out, "Yeah!"
Lanya knuckled at her face, pulling creases into it, as she squinted
at the great, great, great circle.
"Come on,' Kid reiterated. "Let's go, huh?"
Denny followed, too quickly to tell why.
unya waited till they had gone three steps (Kid looked back), then
ran after them, her face bewildered. She caught Kids hand. Kid held
other ?ne who took it tightly. Denny was sweating: "That
IS something. (KId glanced up again.) "I never seen anything like that
before in my life."
Kid looked at Lanya who was walching him oddly, and not where
"W.e're falling into the sun or anything like that,"
KId saId. OthenyISe wed be burned up already. It isn't even hot." He
looked at Denny, who dropped his eyes from the sky and looked back.
"Well, Jesus Christ,' Kid said. "Don',( you think it's pretty fucking
funny?" They didn't laugh. "I mean, theres nothing you can do about
it." He did, alone. It felt good.
"What in the world is it?" Lanya repeated. Her voice was calmer.
"I don't know,' Kid said. "I don',(knowwhat the fuck it is!"
Copperhead, hair like hell-bright rust, sprinted around the corner,
and stopped in the middle of the street, boots apart, elbows bent fists
swinging about his hips and belly. ,
_. The other scorpions caught up. Among them was Siam andJackthe
Ripper and Dennys girl, but neither Dragon Lady nor Nightmare.
Kid let go their hands and pointed to the sky. "Ain't that too fucking much!" He laughed, and the tight things in his throat loosened. He
came Out of the laughter, which had closed his eyes and jerked the small
of his back almost into spasm, to find them watclting. "Hey, Copperhead! Where you going? You going to come with me?"
"What . .. ' Copperhead began to bellow, then coughed, and there
434 Dhalgren
was nothing'left in his voice to sustain. "What is that?" His voice was
tearfully inane. "Is it some kind of heat lightning?"
Someone else said: "Does that look like lightning to you?"
Kid blinked and wondered. "You better corne on with me," he dared.
"You all right, Kid?" the black in the vinyl vest asked from behind
Copperhead, drifting there as udy of Spain drifted behind
"You," Kid spoke carefully. explaining to them as though It were a
lesson "corne on mel" He took a breath and started across the
street. 'As he stepped up on the curb, a hand caught his shoulder: He
looked back; it was Denny. and behind hinI, unya; black scorp,ons
moved around them, passed in front of them.
And foolSteps.
He didrr t look back again.
Perhaps, he thought, we are all going to die in moments, obscured
by !lame and pain. That is why this. And then, perhaps we are not. That
is why this in this way. . Scorpions milled and clustered, and he chuckled agam.
That was as silly as the blades tickling his chest.
uughter grasped the back of his tongue to shake it loose. lay
too heavy in his mouth. So it retreated, and heaved Itself agamst the
spoke of his spine. 1 am happy. he thought. And heard somebody else,
a white girl (not Lanya; the scorpion, who wore a vest and was called
Filament), laughing toO.
So he let his own.
·It doubled him up, staggering.
Somebody-that was unya, and that was, almost, enough to stop
him-cried out.
But others laughed. Somebody else-that was Denny, and when he saw it was,
kept laughing through his puzzlement-un past, up the lId
of a garbage can leaning against the curb, and hurled It up the street.
It weutdattering against a stoop. Denny danced back m the bloodcolored light.
Gold nodes ground in the clouds. , .' .
Kid reached out, had to lean to catch unyas fingers; hIS fmgers, between hers, pummeled the back of her hand. She carne up against his
side, and watched in wonder as others pushed ahead on the cobbled
street.
"Pick a house; he told her.
"Huh-?'"
Creatures of Light and Darkness 435
"Just pick a house on the street," he whispered (she bent nearer to
hear). "Maybe one you don't like very much."
Copperhead bounded past them, flung his arm: The brick-shard
flew across the street, shattered the window; Copperhead, full hair and
sparse beard furious, turned back, grinning.
"That one?" Kid asked.
"No!" with an urgency he could not follow. "At the top of the hill.
That one. There.'
"Okay." Kid wheeled.
The blond girl in the pea jacket was ralling back through the loose
She was crying; she looked at the sky. and cried harder. Denny's
put her arm around her, was talking, was making consoling motIOns WIth her head. Once she glanced at the great, burning wheel; her
face was webbed with rage.
Kid's hand went up across his cheek. Bristle clawed his palm. "This
way!' He waved and turned again. They passed around him as he
in. the lig?t. "Hey, Ripper, Denny, Copperhead)" He caught at
the Jouncmg proJector, and thumbed at the bottom pip. "How do you
turn this thing on?"
"Huh?" Ripper looked back. "Oh ... to the side. Not in"
The pip slid. .
Of course, he thought, I can't see anything from inside. And wondered what he looked like.
unya had stepped away and was looking all over him. Kid beat his
knees, and swung about. And Denny had disappeared in his own deformed explOSion.
the espresso-hued Ripper called, "we gain' on!"
FIgure passed figure as they milled about the cobbles. Kid looked
where was laughing; and Copperhead disappeared in his
arachmd. The menagerie formed in the terrible light.
Th,:"teen, whom Kid hadn't seen till now, passed him. 'Come on,"
he whIspered to Smokey beneath his arm, "let's go out here. This ain't
gonna be no good-"
"l want to watch!l1 she insisted. "I want to watch!n
,Kid reached the porch. Some people were running behind him.
He d broken down three doors in his life: so he expected to bruise his
(The that was Denny blinked beside hinI: the boy was
climbmg the rail.) Kid cr:oshed into the weathered wood. It flew back
easily he w,:"t down on one knee and grabbed at the jamb. (AboUl
him, the mystic aspects lurched.) At the same time, glass broke and
436 Dhalgrert
light filled the hallway as Denny's apparition came through the shattered porch window.
nOh-Jesus ... " A girYs black face passed the door opposite.
Then another's: "It's scorpions ... !"
A skinny black boy ran into the room with a stick. He opened his
mouth and his eyes wide.
"Jil1'lII1Y; you come on--! 11
The boy (was he twenty? Kid staggered to his feet, a little scared,
and not believing he was invisible behind some bright beast) kept on
jerking at the stick.
"Jimmy!" she shrieked, ·come out of there! It's the scorpions, for
God's--H
Jimmy (Kid was surprised) suddenly closed his mouth, flung away
his stick, and ran back through the doorway. Somewhere else in the
house footsteps banged down steps.
Denny beat Kid to the doorway and .extinguished. He leaned
through, then looked back with a puzzled grin (others had already
surged into the room, to fling their shadows in the red light across the
wall.) "Hey, you see the way those niggers run?"
Behind Kid somebody overturned a chair.
He frowned, realized nO one could see it, stopped frowning, and slid
the stud over the bottom of his projector.
"Shit, man," Denny said. "Them was some scared, black motherfuckers." Shaking his head, he went on through the doorway.
"Don't do thatl Don't do that! Don't-"
"What the fuck they got in here?" .
"Come on, God damn it, don't do thaU"
In Ihe maroon light across ,the wall in front of Kid, an apish shadow
grew smaller, and smaller, and smaller, till the hand, only slighdy bigger than Kid's, raised.
The hand clapped Kid's shoulder.
nHey," Copperhead said "They got some place here! Carpet on the
floor .. :. HiS other hand down; and up: "And look at all that
shit on the cefling.·
Kid looked.
Women in gauze and men in armoreareered through woods, by
lakes, and over hills above the molding.
Kid looked down to see Copperhead squinting out the door at the
reddened street. "Well." He looked back. "I'm gonna go see what they
got in here." While somebody screamed in another room, Copperhead's
Creatures of Light and Darkness 437
hand fen again, in perfect amicability. Then he stepped through. Kid
walked back ,through the room, looking for Lanya.
She was standing just inside the door, and angry.
UWhat's the matter?D
"There were people living here!" she hissed. "What in the world ... "
She shook her head.
"r didn't know that," Kid said. ·You picked the house.'
. "And r didn't know what you wanted to do with it!' She spoke with
mtense softness, as though she did not want the disk beyond the roofs
to hear. "What the hell did you want to do?"
"Anything." He shrugged. "Let's go."
She sucked her teeth and gave him her hand. He led her back
through the room, only half as crowded, now.
Before neon confetti from the humming television in the other
room, figores staggered and swayed.
"Here." Siam thrust out a bottle with his bandaged hand.
"I gotta eat," Kid said. "First, r think.' Then he took the bottle anyway and drank three small sips of bad, burning scotch. "You want some?"
"No thank you," she said sofdy, and held his arm with both hands.
As they were walking up the steps to the third floor Kid said "r • h ' , want- t e sentence resolved like an idea he had been s!faitting to recall which only now gave itself to consciousness-"to write something
down.lI
He -:as surprised when she ran up to the top of the staircase, took
somethmg off a phone table, and turned with it. "Here. There's no pen
on this. But you've got yours." He was both surprised and amused at
what her urgency acqUired in the beams through the cracked door at
the halYs end.
He took the phone pad from her, pushed in the door beside themBeneath the pea jacket, opened around her on the floor, the girl was
naked. The edge of ,the window light, through the blinds, crossed the
and banded her ribs, like tape. On top of another girl, Copperheads freckled buttocks .tightened, relaxed and rose, dropped and
tigh.tened, relaxed and rose, between heavy legs. The girl, Kid suddenly
realized, was the one whose name he did not know, who had said goodbye, to whom he had made love.
"Oh," Lanya said, matter-of-factly.
The girl in the pea jacket opened her eyes, cried out sofdy, and
rolled over to clutch the green khaki at Copperhead's thighs. Copperhead grunted, paused, looked back over his shoulder, said, "Hey!» and
438 Dhalgren
grinned hugely. He beckoned awkwardly. (On the floor, the other girl,
breathing heavily, tightened her lips toward an expression that mocked
anger.) "Join the party, motherfucker! You gimme one of yours, l'Il give
you one of mine. fI
"Knock yourself out." Kid backed from the door, with Lanyas hand
inrns.
The hall had filled with people. Kid was hit with black elbows and
brown shoulders.
"What's going on in there?" Blond Denny pushed between them.
"SW.y out ofthere, cocksucker." Kid put his arm around the boy's
chest, pulled him back.
"Why?"
"Because I'd get jealous as hell."
Denny frowned, shrugged, "Okay,' and wormed loose.
u.dy of Spain jogged against Kid's shoulder, shook her head and
said, almost drunkenly: 'Shit! What a way to go. I guess we're. going,
ain't we?' She stepped through, pulling her chains behind her which
had caught against u.nya's shoulder.
umya lugged Kid's arm. #This way,· she said loudly and other people looked. Kid pushed somebody aside ("Hey, how you doing, Kid?"),
who pushed back a botde at hls face.
At the bottom of the stairs, two familiar, long-haired children holding hands (from the park commune?) peered up. "Are you having ...
a party?" They came up the steps, squinting as the light hit their eyes;
light pulled down aCross the ... faces like windoW shades,lending them
false sunburns. Their torn tank tops, blotched rnalive, fuchsia, and
cerise, rearranged forms in the new illumination. Other white people
milled behind them, their mixed voices moving in a different range
than the belligerent-to-shrill of the scorpions'.
"Js thls Nightmare's ... Is thls Nightmare's nest?" a girl asked and
pushed up past the first two. "u.nya!" She stopped halfway up the steps,
her red hair a..dazzle, her face twitching to avert itself from the glare.
"Milly!" Leaving Kid the pad, Lanyaran down to seize Milly's wrists.
"What are you doing?" u.nya's voice was delighted. As her shadow
blocked the glare, Milly begaR-to giggle? No, cry. Kid looked through
a bedroom doorway and the window beyond bright as foil.
He pushed between the people crowding the hall. "Fuck!" he shoutcd at somebody once. "Get out of the wayl"
Somebody behind Kid said (he looked back to see Siam waving his
bandaged arm high to get through; but it was Priest who was speakCreatures of Light and Darkness 439 ing), "No, man, this is the Kid's nest. Nightmare ain't here. Nightmare ain't anywhere around." "Kid-?" which was the ginger spade who had once loaned him a plate; and talking about, not to him: "You mean him over there? He used to be around the commline. I didn't know that was the Kid. How do you like that?" Kid pushed out onto the narrow balcony, surprised to find it empty, and looked up: It was wide enough to be cut off both by roof across the street and hls own roof. I remember this, he questioned, from the other side of sleep? Then added, somberly quizzical: Deadly rays! A weathered pride glared from beneath the chipped rail, with hints of gold paint, inward (shouldn't it be out? Kid thought) toward the wooden doors, at isocephalic attention. With light (he tholight logically as music) from such a source, there could be no shadows. He put bls bare foot on the railing to examine it, to see if tbls new itiumination told him anything. The rail pressed the ball up which stretched the toes down. The concavities at each side of his heel were scaly as the skin at the rim of Siam's bandage. The knuckle of each toe its swirl of black hair, pulled the skin on either side of itself tlmating age. I am closer to thirty than twenty, he thought, put foot down and raised the other. !he suede boot was blotched with what he'd always called salt stalDS, that came from walking in rain puddles. Only it hadn't rained. Below the wrinkled leather-forty feet below-cobbles stretched off between the houses like a mahogany anaconda. He examined his left hand. I don't like what they look like, he thought. I don't like them: Uke something vegetative, yanked from the ground. all roots and nodules, with dirty, cbewed things at Ihe ends like something self-consumed: And remembered the times, on acid: they had actually terrifled him. He examined the right hand. There were scabs along the places where he'd bitten to blood. He'd always considered hls baby face, de- spite passing inconveniences, as, essentially, a piece of luck. But the ha.nds, of some aged and abused workman, he felt wronged by. They fnghtened people (they frightened him); still he could not believe, because it was shape and thei-T t""ture and their hair and great that breaking, by force, the habit of biting and gnawing and bit- IDg would do any good. (Sitting on the sidewalk, once, when he was
440 Dhalgmt
ten, he had rubbed his palms on the concrete, because he wanted to
know what calluses would feel like when he masturbated: had that,
that afternoon, triggered some irrevocable process in the skin which,
still, after a few days of labor, left his hand horn-hard and cracking
weeks, even months, later?) He liked Lanya to cradle them in her soft
ones, kiss them, tickle the inner flesh with her tongue, make love to
them like gnomes, while he, voyeuristically; observed and mocked and
felt tender.
He looked down at the chains: ran his fingers between them; lifted
up the hanging orchid and watched it turn under the sourceless gold.
Then he sat against the shingled wall, with his feet at the feet of the
lions, took the pad into the lap, and began to click his pen. .
Among other sounds inside, somebody was shrieking and gaspmg
and shrieking again, which meant somebody was doing something terrible. Or somebody thought somebody was.
Actions are interesting to watch. I learn about the actors. Their
movements are emblems of the tensions in this internal landscape,
which their actions resolve. About-to-act is an interesting state to eX.-
perience, because I am conscious of just those tensions. itself
feels fairly dull; it not only resolves, it obliterates those tensIOns from
my consciousness. Acting is only interesting as it leads to new ten:'ions
that, irrelevantly; cause me to act again. But here, beneath
tic light, with the cardboard-backed phone pad covering 'th.e hole ill
my jean knee, that isn't what I want to wnte. 1 am about to 1
my thumb from the ballpoinrs button. 1 work the pen up ull my fingers (hideous?) grip the point. I begin.
Lanya crashed Kid's ken like a small, silent iguanodon. Kid did not
move. Lanya sat sideways on a lions head and looked across the street
forforty-five astounding seconds. Then at Kid: "You're still writing on
that. .. ?"
"No.» The hypersensitivity left over from working had resolved with
LanyaS voice_ "No, I've heen finished a rew minutes now."
Lanya squinted at the immense semi--circle. Then she said, "Hey ... '
She frowned. "Irs going down!"
Kid nodded. "You can see it faIling almost."
The douds that moiled the edge had deepened from gold to bronze.
ThIOe'luarters of the circle bad been visible above the roofs when
had first walked in. the street. Now it was slightly under half. (And still
half was awfully huge.) Lanya hunched her shoulders.
CTeatures of Light and Darkness 441
Denny came through the doors, paused, a hand on each, to screw
his face in the glare. Then, silently, he sat on the rail beside Lanya,
gripped his knees, his arm an inch from hers.
Denny comes: some fantastic object.
She comes: some object more fantastic, and with a history.
lanya bent forward, picked up the pad, read. After moments, she
said, "I like that."
But what, Kid went on thinking, if someone were stupid enough to
ask me for a choice? He tried an ironic smile: but the ironic part got
fumbled in the machinery of his face. So he guessed it was just asmile.
Anyway a smiles what they gave him back.
Denny said, going down, • unnecessarily for her.
One hand pressed against her knee, the other went across her face
,
Terror clanged in him like a spoon against a bent pan. Kid reached
forward, touched her shin. Terror? he thought: When what terrifies is
neither noisy; nor moves quicltly; and lasts hours, then we become very
different. I don't know who she is! He gripped harder.
She frowned, moved the toe of her sneaker from his bare foot.
So he dropped ·his hand.
With her hand on her stomach, she took a breath, and raised her
perspiring face, blinking and blinking her green eyes, to watch.
else came out, Lanya asked, "Why aren't you
afraId? KId thought about dreaming, could think of nothing to say; so
nodded toward the falling light.
She said: "Then I won't be either."
The boy who'd come out was the pimply; stubble-bearded scorpion.
He looked around uncomfortably as though he felt he might have interrupted something, seemed about to turn and go (what is he feeling,
Kid wondered; what makes him look this conventional part?), when
Frank, the poet from the commune, came out.
Then two black girls (thirteen? twelve?) holding hands, stepped
out, not blinking, their hair almost shorn, small gold rings in their ears.
And there were mOre people in the doorway. (Will the balcony hold?)
He wondered also at how much easier that was to wonder than about
what blotted out the sky.
"It's going down, see,' Denny repeated.
He enjoys, saying that to lanya: But with nine people
bere, the equations are different; he can't get the same reactioDS.
Briefly he pictured Nightmare and Dragon lady.
Milly pushed by Copperhead. The light stole the brilliance from the
442 Dhalgren
dilferent reds of their bait by dealing "qual flamboyance to e"erything.
She kneeled at the rail. Light between two lions made a ragged bandage across her calf.
The scabs, Kid thought, are bright as red glass.
There were too many people.
MiHy brushed at her cheek.
Why is a gi"en gesture given as it is? Hers? She's guilty making any
motions at all in a situation demanding immobility. (He looked at the
scratch.) She's guilty ..• ?
There were too many people.
The long-baited youngsters, hands linked, stepped through; one
took the hand of the pimply. unsha"en scorpion (who was also very
drunk): he breathed loudly and swayed into people.
They didn't mo"e.
"What are you going to do with-that?" Lanya asked, softly enough
to sound soft even in·this silence.
The scorpion's breath was thunderous.
"I don't knOw." That sounded thunderous too.
"Let me take it." She tore off thelhree pages, corrected, and recorrected. (Does it take this much light to illuminate the material for another poem?) With a head movement (shadow spilled from the green
target of her eye down her cheek) she stopped him. "J have your notebook at home. I'll put these with it. I want to go." She turned to Denny.
And the shadow had rolled somewhere beneath her chin; in the creases of her eyelid he could see sweat. "You want to walk me home?"
Kid wanted to protest, decided no; offer to come too?
She touched Denny's arm. Her nose and ear were shadowed: the incredible disk had lowered so thaI what remained was small enough
that everyone around them, beneath Q folded elbow, behind a heel on
reddened tile, under frayed d&D.inl where a sleeve bad Ibeen torn off,
or within and behind the curves of flesh in flesh of the ear, had once
more grown shadows. She looked afraid.
Lanya st"ad, and people stepped apart.
l)eany, like someone just awakened, clambered from the rail, and,
blinking about him (at the olhers as much as Kid), followed her.
Denny left, and people closed around.
"When it goes down ... " the pimply scorpion began.
Kid, and the two people who held his band,looked.
Something white had dried on his mouth. His lashless lids were
pink and swollen.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 443
The two looked away.
"When it goes :U the way down, there won't be any fuckin' light at
aU, agam ... ever. He shook his bead, scuffed his boots rocked on the
doorsill. "Black as a fucking bitch ... yeah!" '
They've gone, Kid thought. No light at all?
Fifteen minutes later, when it had set completely. the sky had returned to its ordinary grey.
3
He woke ... alone?
Someone was climbing up the loft ladder.
He struggled to choose between dreams and ... the rest. Because
they had all left the muraled house, and wandered back to the nest.
Milly had talked to him, aimlessly. in the sloped street, mostly all surpnsed that he was the same Kid everybody had been talking about and
how glad she was to know that she knew him, till he'd decided was
trying to put the make on him and had gotten angry. "Get the fuck out
of here, you stupid birch!" he'd yelled in the street and made to hit her.
She'd run away; he'd laughed, loudly. lill he was staggering. Copperup to him and beat him on the shoulder, laughing too.
} dldn t like that one either. Shit, YOll can ha"e one of mine ... " He'd
so he wouldn't have to speak, thinking with perfectly
mamacal pnde: I have, I have already-
"Kid, are you okay?" Denny's ears were lit from behind and below
His face was dark. .
"Yeah ... ?"
Denny came up over the edge.
"They're making food-" and at the word, Kid smelled it-"inside
Nightmare and Dragon Lady just came back. You sleepin'?" .
·Come-" and at the word, Denny. all shoulders and chin and elbows, wedged against him-"here. Yeah." He held the warm knobby
shapes and lay there smelling grease and a hot, "egetative stench that
defmed no food he recognized; but he likod it anyway.
"Lanya's got a nice place," Denny said..
"Yeah?" Kid thought hesso light; but his edges are sharp. "You ball
her again?1J
" ... Yeah," Denny said. "In herroom, at her house. 1 guess that was
all right."
Surprised, Kid opened his eyes. Cracks crossed the dim ceiling.
444 Dha!gren
"Oh." He shifted Denny to the side. "You got more energy than I do. I
was tired when I got back here."
OShel; got a nice place" Denny repeated. "Real nice."
"Why'd she want to 1" He nubbed his rough chin for the itching.
Denny squirmed to get comfortable. "To see about her doss, she
said." Denny squirmed again.
"Class?"
The L about the window shade had finally taken on the deep color
of evening. "Her kids. She's been looking out for this group of kids, you know?
About eight and nine years old. Black kids mostly." .
"No, I didn't know." He let his lips purse to a tent where, Wlth the
help of air, they were off his teeth. Well, he seen Ho,::
many days gone? She'd said she had a place, yes; "No, I dldn t know.
He frowned at the top of Denny's head.
"1 like her," Denny said. "1 like her a lot." Dennys face came up from
under the hair. "You know, I think shelikes me too?"
"Guess she does," Kid said. "Did she check ..• her class?"
"No," Denny said. "Not whUe 1 was there. She was ?oing to. But
got to {uckin' around again. Screwin', you She saId she was
to after left. If she didn't go to sleep first. I think she was pretty tIred.
, Kid looked at the ceiling again. "How long she had the kids?"
"A couple of weeks," Denny said. "Thats what she told
she likes it. They meet a little way from her place. Thats Teal nice.
"What's it like?" A couple of weeks? He was too eJ<hausted to be
upset. ., . "Rea! nice." Some of Denny's hair brushed and caught on KIds chm.
"Well, you're good for something, cocksucker. Hey!" Kid bunched
the muscles ·of his leg under Denny's stiffening groin. "No, man. Fuck
off. I don't want to now."
Denny pulled himself back on all fours. "You better go eat something, then. They don't got that much. They'll eat it all."
Kid sat, nodding. "Yeah, come on." He climbed groggily down, and
stood in the doorway. Why (watching Denny clirob) did she tell him all that about her new
place, and her class, and not me? Why didn't I ask? he answered. He
could smUe at that, finally.
"Come on." Denny took Kid's elbow and led hiro down.
Halfway up the hall, Kid sucked his teeth and puRed free. It was a
gentle pull; but Denny's hand leapt away at the motion, frightened and
Creatures of Light and Darkness 445
anticipatory, despairing and wild. Without looking at him particularly,
Denny stepped back to let him through.
. "Jesus Christ!." Nightmare exclaimed, turning with a full plate in
h,s hand, gestunng first, then scooping with his fork. 'Wasn't that
something this afternoon? I mean, wasn't that too much!" He fIlled his
mouth and spoke on, scattering little pieces. "We heard about you
cha.sing out the niggers! Hey-" he gestured to Dragon Lady who sat
wall-"we about what he did to those niggers."
Shit, Dragon Lady saId dryly, and looked at Kid only from the corner" of eye. "r don't care what he do to any God-damn niggers.·
1 dldn t even know they were in the house," Kid said.
Dragon I.ady,took another mouthful. "Shit," she repeated and pried
with her spoon tip through what was on her plate. '
"Give 'em something to eat," Nightmare yelled toward the kitchen.
"Baby!" Dragon Lady bellowed; her shoulders shook; nobody
stopped doing anything. "Adam!" She flung the words up like
grenades. "Bring some more food out for 'em!"
"Here go!" Baby, still naked, pushed between the people at the
door, leadmg (dangerously) with steaming plates.
"This is yours. n
Kid ignored the dirty thumb denting what must have been a hash
of canned vegetables (he pulled the fork out from where it had been
buried: corn, peas, okra, foll of!) and (he tasted the first mouthful)
meat. (Spam?) Baby gave the other plate to Denny. He returned to serve
Cathedral, Jack the Ripper, Devastation, all sitting about sUently.
Copperhead, not served yet, watched from the couch, and grinned
and nodded when Kid looked at him.
"Here you go.' Adam shoved a plate at Copperhead. He took it
saluted Kid with a fork with twisted tines, then dropped his
and shoveled.
Denny's girl friend (should I find out her name?) with a coffee cup
of the hash, came out the. kitchen, crossed to sit right by Denny on
the and made a bIg thmg of not looking at Kid. The girl in the
pea Jacket, next to Copperhead on the couch, occasionally picked food
from Copperhead's plate with a spoon: Copperhead more or less ignoredher.
·You had a party?" Nightmare exclaimed in answer to a question
Kid hadn't heard asked. ·We ran! Adam, Baby, the Uidy, and me! r was
SO scared I didn't think I was gonDa make it. Shit, I'm still scared."
The last laughter to traUaway was Dragon Lady's gusty chuckle.
446 Dhalgren
"We were in the park.' Nightmare waved his fork above his head;
more people sat down. "Baby, Adam, Dragon Lady, and me. You know
the old weather tower in the park?"
(What, Kid wondered, had George been doing in the brazen light of
this noon? What had June?)
it began, I mean after it began-first we thought that whole
side ohhe city was on fire-afterwe could see what it was-" he sho.ok
his head at somebody who started a comment-Uno, no, I don't know
what Ihe fuck it was. Don't ask me. After we could see it, we went up
the steps 10 watch. Didn't we?"
Dragon Lady sat, smiling and shaking her head, which, when she
noticed the shift of attention, changed to nodding: the smile stayed.
"We just climbed up theFe and watched the whole thing. Go up. And
go down." Nightmare whistled. "Jesus Christl"
We live, Kid thought; and die in different cities.
"You were out there in it," the scorpion in vinyl asked, watching,
"until it was all over?n
Copperhead protested: "We watched it going down-"
"All over?" But Nightmares mouth hung open, mocking his interlocutor. "What's all over?"
Adam rubbed the chains on his chest: the rest were still.
"You think it's atloved" Nightmare demanded.
The blond girl in the pea jacket held her spoon in both hands tightly between her knees. "When it went down," she said, "it was just like
regular day again •.. here. And it was light for four or five hours till it
was time to get dark." She looked back over her shoulder at the black
glass; the brass lion on the windowsill watched the night from beneath
his bulbless stalk.
Dragon Ladys laughter built in the silence.
"Shit." Nightmare filled his mouth again and yelled at his plate:
"You don't know if the sun is ever gonoa come up again! We could all
be burned up to death by tomorrow. Or frozen. What were you saying,
Baby, about maybe the earth got pushed alI its orbit or something like
that, maybe into the sun, or out past it-"
"I didn't say that." Baby looked down at himself, pimply chest, uncircumcised genilals, bowed knees, dirty feet; his nakedness for the
fitst time was out of place. "I wasn't sayin' it ,that serious-"
"There'd be an earthquake if that happened.· Brown Adam, with his
Philadelphia accent, held his chains in his fist. "I told you that. A big
earthquake, or a tidal wave; both maybe. Nothing like thatS happened.
And there'd have to be if the earth got pushed somewhere-"
Creatures of Light and Darkness 447
"So maybe-" Nightmare looked up-"in ten minutes there's gonna
be a fuckin' earthquake!"
Then the lightbulb hanging from the ceiling dropped to quarter
dimness.
Kid tried to swallow his heart; it threatened to burst and fill his
mouth with blood.
Someone was crying again.
Kid looked to see if it was Denoy. But it was another scorpion (Spider?) on the other side of Nightmare. Denay's face,even in the yellowish half-dark, was cut with blades of shadow from his hair.
"Oh, come on!· Smokey edged from behind Thirteen's shoulder.
"Look, it used to do that four or five times a day when we stayed here."
In the kitchen something hummed: the light returned to full brightness.
Nightmare ate doggedly.
No one else did.
"You guys make up any more of this shit?" Nightmare nodded toward Adam and Baby. "It's good." Then looked around. "You don't
know if it's Over or not. n
"I could use some more," Dragon Lady said.
Baby came forward with bis hands out for their plates.
"The mistake-" Kid surprised himself by speaking, took a mouthful to stop, but went on anyway-"isn' t thinking that it's finished." I'm
imitating Nightmare, he thought, then realized, no, I'm doing what
Nightmare did for the same reason. "The mistake is thinking it began
this afternoon."
"Right on, mothenucker!" Nightmare shook his fork for emphasis.
Kid took another mouthful, and thought: I may throw up. And then
,thought: No, I'm too hungry.
"We got some more out there in the big pot," Adam was saying.
"Wby don't you guys go out and get it till it's all gone."
A shadow made Kid look up from the last of his eating.
Adam stood there, hand out for Kid's plate, about (Kid realized) to
burst out crying too. Kid gave it to him.
Nightmare, Dragon Lady, and me get served first, Kid Ie£leeted as
Baby brought his seconds. Well, Copperhead seemed at ease.
Finished, Kid put his fork on the floor and stood up.
"Hey, where're you going?" Copperhead asked, no belligerence, all
bewilderment.
"Taking a walk.'
On the bottom step of the house, he noted two streetlights in the
448 Dhalgren
distance. Burn up at any minute? Or freeze at the advent ofan .ic,: age,
twenty minutes to completion? The air was the same excruClatmgly
bland temperature it had been night after night after night. The door
opened behind him: Denny looked out.
"1 want to go over and 500 Lanya's place," Kid said, turning. "You
want to show me the way?"
"1 ... I can't," Denny said. "Shes upset. And she wants to talk ...
tome."
"Fuck you, cocl<sucker." Kid started down the block. "See you later."
(He wasn't angry at all.) That was pretty good. Halfway to the corner,
however, he realized Denny would be the only way to fmd lauya's new
place. (Then he was.)
He could try the bar. But if she had a house now, what was the
chance she'd be at Teddy!; tonight?
He looked back, ready to yell to Denny to get the fuck on down here.
The door was closed.
And 1 still dorr t know her name!
He took a breath between his teeth. Maybe he'd findlanya at the bar.
At the corner of the hil\: surprised at how many SliIeet lamps-perhaps one OUt of five-worked in this neighborhood. The one diagonally across the street gave enough light to make out the charred walls
of the big house. (The stronger burned smell had made him stop.) The
columns supporting the balcony over the door had charred through,
so that the platform, with its rail of lions, hung askew. Even so it took
Kid a whole minute to be sure what house it was. Only houses he could
see around confirmed it.
Four, five, sbe: hours since they had screamed and laughed and yelled
inside it?
Chilled to gooseflesh in the neutral air, he hurried away.
4
" ... definitelySClw it?"
"Oh, yes."
'You were already in the city?"
"That's right. tI
"You said earlier you didn't see the whole thing though."
"I caught, 1 guess, now it must have been, the last ten or ftfteen minutes. Roger came and woke me up to see." .
"You saw it from inside the house then?"
Creatures of Light and Darkness 449
"Well, first out my window. Then we went down to the gardens. I
tell you, now, it was pretty strange."
The others laughed. "Hey." Paul Fenster said, half standing to look
at others seated. "We've just about got the Captain boxed in here.
Why doesn't somebody move back, there?"
"That's all right. If I want to get out, I'll just bust on through."
"1 imagine-" Madame Brown reached down to play with Muriel's
muzzle-"you aren't any closer to an explanation than we are. n
"I think that was about the strangest thing I ever saw, I'll be honest
now.:n
"As strange as anything you ever saw in space?" from the man in
purple angora.
"Well, I tell you, this afternoon was pretty ... I guess you'd say,
spaced au!."
They laughed again.
The heavy blond Mexican with the blanket shirt rose from beside
Tak and walked to the door, passing within a foot of Kid, and lefl. Tak
saw Kid. With tilting head, he beckoned.
Kid, curious, went to sit in the vacated seat.
Tak leaned to whisper, "Captain Kamp ... " A dozen others had
pulled chairs up to listen to the crew.cut man in the green, shortsleeved shirt who sat in the Corner booth.
Tak folded his hands across the bottom of his leather jacket so that
the top pushed out from his blond chest.
"What I want to know," purple angora announced, '. . . down,
sweetheart, down-" Muriel had momentarily switched allegiances-
"I want to know is, if it could pOSSibly have beeo some kind of trick.
I mean, is rhere any way somebody could have made that seem to
happen? I mean ... well, you know: in a man-made way."
'Well ... " The Captain looked among his listeners. "He's your engineer, isn't he?" His look seltled on Tak-who reared back with a high
laugh.
That must be as self-conscious as I've ever seen him, Kid thought.
He'd never heard Tak make that sound before.
"No," Tak said. "No, I'm afraid that doesn't have anything to do with
any engineering I'd know anything about."
"What I want to know-now what I want to know," Fenster said.
"You've been in space. You've been on the moon . .. n He paused, then
added in a difIerent voice: "You're one of the ones that was actually on
the moon."
450 Dhalgnm
Captain Kamp was only attentive.
"Wive had here some sort of ... astrolegical happening, and it's gOt
liS all pretty shoek. I want to know if you ... well, from being up en
the moOl!., er like that, you might knew something more about it .•
Kamp's face ghosted a smile. Kid sea:rc:hed fer the names ef the astronauts from the four moonsbots he'd foUowed closely, tried to recaU what
he could about the fifth. Captain Kamp eressed his arms on the booth
table. He wasn't very tall.
"Now itS certainly possibl."....· Kamp punctuated his southwestern
speoch with small nods-"that there's an astronomical, er better, cosmological explanation. But I'U be frallk: I den't koew what it is."
"De you think we should worry?' Madame Brown asked in a voice
with no worry in it at aU.
Kamp, whose crew mixed grey and gold, nodded. "Werry? Well,
we're aU here. And alive. That's certainly no. reason not to. werry. But
werry isn't going to. do us much geod, new, is it? New yesterdayabout this time yesterday-l was ill DaHas. And if that thing was as big
as it looked and reaHy some sort of body IIi the sky, a comet or a sun.
I suspect it would ha ve been seen a long way elI coming, with telescopes. And nobody (Old me about it."
"It sounds, Captain, as though you don't believe it's serious."
Kamp's smile said as much. Kamp said, "1 saw it-some. of it, anyway."
"Then," Kid said, and ethers turned. 'you don't koow how big in.-
ally was."
"Now that,D the Captain answere.d, "I'm afraid, is it.»" His jaw was
wider than his forehead. "Now you .all, Roger toO, described something
whicb practically fiUed up half the sky. So ebviously what 1 saw was
oulya little bit. And then there was the stery about-George, was it?"
Tak loeked around the room. frowned, and again whispered to. Kid:
"George was bere a few minutes ago. He must have gene eut just before you came-"
"Now I'm afraid nobody eutside ... ef Bellona, saw that ene. And
Rogertetls me he didn't either.'
"lcel!ainly did," Tak whispered.
"1 certainly did! " someone cried.
"Well." Kamp smiled. "Not too many ether people did, and certainly nobedy outside Bellona."
"You saw what happened today." Teddy, arms folded, leaned against
the back of the next booth.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 451
·Yes, I guess 1 did.'
"You mean," Fenster announced jOvially, "you went Hom here to the
moon and back, and you didn't see anything on the way that would
tell us anything at all about this thing this afternoon?"
Kamp said: "Nope."
"Then what use was it, I ask you?" Fensterlooked around for somebedy's back to slap. "I mean noW what was the use of it?"
Someone said. "You haven't been with the space program a
while ... 1D
"Now you don't really leave it. Just last week I was down for medIcal testing for long-range results. That, I don't ever expect to stop. But
I'm much less involved with it now than some of the others."
"Why did you leave?" the purple angora asked. "Was it your idea or
theirs-if you can answer a question like that?"
·Well.· This, a considered sentence. "I suspect they thought it was
a teuchier question than I did at the time. But I doubt they wanted me
that much if! didn't want them. My interest in the space program just
about ended with splashdown. The tests, the resean:h work afterward
thatwas importanL The parades, the celebrations, the panels, the pub:
licity-I think the fun in that was exhausted a month after I came out
of the isolation chamber. The rest-probably more so for me than for
the. others, because that's the kind of person I am-was just a nuisance.
Also," and he smiled, "I've occasionally been koewn to pick up a guitar
ata party and sing a folksong or two. Nothing political, mind you. But
,they still frown on that sort of thing."
Everyone laughed. Kid thought: Is he for real?
And a second thought, like a stutter: My reaction is as fIXed as his
action. And Kid laughed, though later than the others. Two or three
glanced at him.
"Ne," Kamp went en, "I suppose I saw myself as something of an
adventurer ... as much as a navy lest pilot can be. Apollo for me was
an adventure-practically an eight-year adventure, with aU the preparation. But When it was over, I was ready to go on to something else."
"So you've come to BeHtma?b. Madame Brown said, as Fenster said:
"After the moon, where else is there?"
"Now, you're right . .. "
Kid wondered which question Kamp was answering.
" . . . but I'm just beginning to see that myself."
"Are you here in any olIicial connection?" asked another woman.
"I'd imagine," Fenster said, "y01£re never offiCially disconnected.n
452 Dhalgren
"No. I'm here unofficially."
"What does that meaR?" someone challenged.
Fenster scowled, offended for Kamp, who merely said, "They know
I'm here. But they gave me no instructions before I came. They won't
ask me anything about what I did or saw after I COme back."
"Why dan't we break up this Star Chamber?" Fenster stood. "Come
on, the Captain is nice enough to talk to us all at once, but we've got
to give the man a chance to circulate."
"Now this is quite informal," Kamp countered, "compared to what
I'm used to. I would like a chance to walk around though."
"Come on, come on." Fenster made shooing motions.
Some rose.
The bartender rolled his cuffs above the blurry blue beasts and
strolled to the counter.
Tak's chair scraped.
"Come on, now, let's let the Captain get himself a drink. Madame
Brown, you look like you could use one too."
Kid shook his hands below the chair edge to stop the tiBgling.
Tak stood, stretched to tiptoe, looked around. "Wonder where
George got off to. He was all curious when he discovered we had a genuine man in the moon with us."
They walked to the bar.
Teddy was retliming chairs.
Once the dozen clustered at the Captain's booth dispersed, the place
looked empty.
"I thought Llnya was here, maybe."
hands locked. "I haven't seen her. Madame B. might know
where she is." And unlocked. "Hey, I saw the big advertisement in the '
Times, all over page three. Congratulations." Takfrowned. "By the way,
what did you do at the coming of the great white light? Orange, I guess
it was, really. You got any opinions to pass the time with while We wait
to see if there's going to be a tomorrow?"
Kid leaned on meshed fingers. "1 don't knOw. I didn't do anything
much. I had some people with me. 1 think they were more upset than
1 was. You know, Tak, for a while I thought ... " The bartender set down
a beer bottle. " ... no, thars silly." Kid pulled the. bottle to him,leaving
a sweat ribbon. "Isn't it?" The candles glittered in it.
"What?"
"I was going to say, for a while I thought it was a dream."
"ff I woke up right now, I'd reel a lot better."
Creatures of Light and Darkness 453
"No. Not that." Kid lifted his bottle once, twice, a third, a fourth, a
Ilfth time from lapping rings. "When it was rising, I remember 1 went
Qut to take a look from ,the back porch; and thinking maybe I was
dreaming. Suddenly I woke up. In bed. Only, when I got up, later, it
was still there. Finally, after it went down, I went to sleep again. You
know, right now-' he smiled, to himself till it overcame the strictures
of his facial muscles and burst stupidly onto his face-"\ still don't
know what I dreamed and what I didn't. Maybe I didn't really see any
more than the Captain.'
"You went to sleepr
"1 was tited." Saying that annoyed Kid. "What about you?"
"Christ, 1-" The bartender brought Tak:' bottle. "What did 1 do?"
tak snorted. "1 saw the light coming through those bamboo bliBds I
have, and went out on the roof to take a look. 1 watched it rising for
about three minutes. Then I freaked.'
"What'd you do?"
"1 went down into the stairwell and sat in the dark for about an hour
or so ..• \ guess. I'd got this whole paranoid thing about radiationno, doB't laugh. We might all start lOSing our hair in the next six hours
while Olir capillaries fall apart. Finally I got scared of just sitting in the
dark and went up to look again ... " He stopped moving his bottle
around the wet circle. "I'm just glad I don't have a heart condition. It
stretched over so much of the horizon I couldn't look at one edge and
see the other. I couldn't look at where the bottom was cut off by the
roofs. and see the top." Tak's bottle rumbled about. "\ went back down
into the stairwen, closed the door, and just cried. For a couple of hours.
I ·couldn't stop. While 1 was crying, 1 thought about lots of things. One
of them, by the way, was you.'
"What?"
"' remember sitting there and asking myself if this was what the inside of insanity felt like-Ah, there: you've taken offense. n
He hadn't. But now wondered if he should.
·Well, I'm sorry. That's what 1 thought, anyway."
"You were really that scared?"
"You weren't? n
·r guess a lot of people around me were. I thought about all the ter--
rible things it could have been-like everybody else. But if it was any
of them, there wasn't anything I could do."
'You really are almost as weird as people keep trying to make us
think you are. Look, when you come up short against the edge like
454 Dhalgren
that, when you discover the earth really is round, when you find out
you've killed your father and married your mother after all, or when
you look at the horizon and see something, like that, rising-man, you
have to have some sort of human reaction: laugh, cry. sing, something!
You can't just lie down and take a nap."
Kid lingered in the ruins of his confusion. "1. .. did a lot of laughing.·
Tak snorted again. "Okay, so you're not that flippy. I'd just hate to
think you were as brave as everybody keeps going on you are.·
"Me?" This couldn't, Kid thought, be what the inside of courage relt
like.
"Excuse me," the southwestern voice said from Kid's other side.
"You were pointed out to me as ... the Kid?"
Kid turned, with his confusion. "Yeah •.. ?"
Kamp looked at it, and laughed. Kid decided he liked him. Kamp'
said, "I'm supposed to deliver a message to you, from Roger."
"Huh?" .
"He told me if I came here I would probably meet you. He'd likeif it's all right with you-if you'd come up to the house three Sundays
from now. He says that he'll be squeezing more time together, so it will
be in slightly less than two weeks-now 1 donlt know how you guys
put up with that-" He laughed again. "Roger wants to have a party for
you. For your book.» The Captain paused with a consideration nod.
·Saw it. Looks good. Good luck on it, now."
Kid wondered what to say. He tried: "'Ihank You."
"Roger said to come in the evening. And bring twenty or thirty
friends, if you want. He says your party. It starts at sunset; in three
Sundays."
"Presumptuous bastard," Tak said. "Sunset? He might at least wait
and see if there's a tomorrow morning." With his forefinger he hooked
down his cap visor and walked off.
Kid was pondering statements to place into the silence, when Kamp
apparently decided he'd try: "I'm afraid I don t know much about poetry."
Liked him, Kid feit. But for the life of him he didn't know why.
"I read some of Roger's copy, though. But if 1 started asking questions about it, nOw, I'd probably just end up looking worse than I already do."
"Mmmm.» Kid nodded and pondered. "You get tired of people asking you all those questions?"
'Yes. But it wasn't too bad this evening. At least we were talking
about somethiog real. 1 mean something that happened, today. It's betCreatures of Light and Darkness 455 ter than all those discussions where they ask you whether, as an as- tronautt you believe in long hair, abortions, race relations, or the pill. n "You're a very public mao, aren't you? You say you're not really into the space program any more. But you're doing public reiations work for them right now." "Exactly what I'm dOing. I don't claim to be doing anything else. Except enjoying myself. They're beginning (a accept the idea of hav- ing a nonconformist doing front work for them." Kamp glanced around. "Though 1 suspect compared to most of you guys here, eVen some of the ducks up at Roger's, I'm more or less the image of the es- tablishment, folk songs or not, hey? Well, that makes me Bellona's biggest nonconformist. I don't mind." "QuestiOns like, did you leave, or were you kicked out-what do you do when people ask you the same questions .over and over? Espe- cially the embarrassing ones." "If you're a public man, as soon as you get a question more than three times, you figure out the mosl honest public answer you can give. Especially w the embarrassing ones. "Is that a question you get asked a lot?" I'Well.:rJ Kamp mulled, "more times than three.1'I "Then 1 guess it would be okay to ask you questions about the moon." Kid grinned. Kamp nodded. "Sounds like a pretty safe topic." "Can you tell me something about the moon you've never told any- body else before?" After a second, Kamp laughed. "Now that is a new one. I'm not sure I know what you mean.» "You were there. I'd like to know something about the moon that could only know who was actually on it. I don't mean thing big. But just something." "The whole flight was broadcast. And we were pretty thorough in our report. We tried to take pictures of just about everything. Also, thatl; a few years ago; and we were only out walking around for sixaRd a half haUls." "Yeah, I knOw. I watched it.' . "Then I still don't get you." "Well: 1 could bring a couple of television cameras in here, say; a;'d lake a lot of pictures, and report on all the people, tell how many were here or what have you. But afterward, if somebody asked me to tell them something that wasn' t in the coverage, I'd close my eyes and sort
456 Dhalgrrn
of picture the place. Then hnight say. well, on the back of the counter
with the bottles, the bottle second from the lefl-I don't remember
what the label was-but the little cone of glass at the bottom was just
above the top of the liquor." Kid opened his eyes. "See?"
Kamp ran his knuckles under his chin. "I'm not used to thinking
like that. But itS interesting."
"Try. Just mention some rock, or collection ofrocks, or shape on the
horizon that you didn't mention to anyone else."
"We took photographs orall three hundred and sixty degrees of the
honzon-"
"Then something else."
"It would be easier to tell you something like that about the module.
I remember ... " Then he cocked his head.
"I guess that would do," Kid said. "But I'd prefer it was abOUt the
moon."
"Hey. here's something. n Kamp leaned forward. "When 1 got down
the ladder-do you remember the foil-covered footpads that the modules rested on? You say you watcbed it.'
Kid nodded
"Well, now, when I was getting some of the equipment out of the
auxiliary compartments-I'd been actually on surface maybe a minute,
maybe not quite: A lot of people, back before the probe shots, had the
idea the moon was covered with dust. But it was purplish brown dirt
and rock and gravel. The reet didn't sink at all."
Kid thought: Translation.
Kid thought: Transition.
"The module's feet were on universal joints, you know? Anyway.
The one to the left of the entrance was tilted on a small rock, maybe
two inches through. The shadows were pretty sharp. 1 guess when I
was passing by it, my shadow passed over the module foot. And the
shadow from the pad, made by the rock it was sitting on, and my shadow, joining it, for just a second made it look like something moved
under there. You know? I was excited, see, because 1 was OR the moon.
And it just isn'llike anything in the training sessions at all But I do
remember for maybe three seconds, while 1 was going on doing all the
things 1 had to do, thinking, 'There's a moon-mouse, or a moon-beetle
under there.' And feeling silly that 1 couldn't say .... ything-I was
broadcasting all the time, describing wbat 1 saw-because there couldrt't
be anything alive on the moon, rigbt? Like 1 said, it just took me a
couple of seconds to figure out what it really was. But for a moment it
Creatures oj Light and Darkness 457
was pretty funny. Now there. That's something I never told anybody ...
no, 1 think 1 did mention it once to Neil, when 1 got back. But 1 don't
think he was listening. And 1 told it just like a joke.·
Formation. Kid thought: Transformation.
"Is that tbe sort of thing you mean?"
Kid had expected Kamp to be smiling at the end of his story. But
eacb feature rested just within the limit of sobriety.
"Yes. What are you thinking now?:
"I'm wondering why 1 told you. But I guess Bellona is the kind of
place you come to do something new, right? See new things. Do new
things."
"What do people say about this place, outside? Do people who come
back from here tell you all about life under the fog? Who did you talk
to- that made you want to come?"
"I don't think I've ever met .. nyone who's actually gone and come
back from here......,xcept Ernest Newboy. And we just sbook hands in
passing and didn't get a chance to talk. I've met some people who were
evacuat"d back at the beginning. Once they stopped trying to cover it
on TV, people stopped talking, 1 guess-people don't talk about it
now. lI
Kid let his head lean.
"They refer to it,· Kamp said. "You can be sitting around somebodys
livjng room, in Los Angeles or Salt Lake, talking about this, that, or the
other, and somebody might mention somebody he used to know here.
A friend of mine in phYSiCS, driving down from the University of Montana, said he gave two girl hitch-hikers a lift who told him they were
gOing here. He thought that was very strange, because, the last the
paper reported, there was supposed to be some national guards
around. p
what 1 heard too,· Kid said. "But that was awhile before 1
came. I haven't seen any. II
"How long have you been here?"
"I don't knOw. It feels like a pretty fair time. But 1 really couldn't tell
you." Kid shrugged. "I wish 1 did know more ilian that ... sometimes."
Kamp was trying not to frown. "Roger said you would be an interesting person. You are."
"rve never met him."
"So he told me."
"I guess you don't know how long you're going to stay either?"
"Well now, I baven't really made up my mind. When I came here, I
458 Dhalgnm
wasn't thinking of the trip exactly as a vacation. But I've. been here a
few days, and I'll tell you, especially with the busmess thlS afternoon,
I don't quite know what to make of it."
"You're interesting too,:n Kid said after a moment: "But I doni t
whether hecause you've been to the moon; or just because you re
interesting. lUke you." .
Kamp laughed, and picked up his beer. "Come on, since we're
so hard to be honest: What reason could you possibly have for hkmg
me?»
"Because even though you're a public person-and public people
are great if you happen to be the public-some the 'you' gets
through. 1 think you're very proud of the thmgs you ve done, and
you're modest about them, and don't want to talk about them
it's serious-even joking serious. To protect that modesty, I thmk
you've had to do some things that haven't made you all that
Measuredly, Kamp said, "Yes. But what do you get by tellmg me
that?"
"Because 1 like you, 1 want you wtrust me a little. If I can show you
I understand something ahout you, perhaps you will."
"Ah, ha!" Kamp drew back, ineptly mocking theatrical
"Just for argument now: Supposing you do know something about me,
how do I know you won't uSe it against me?"
Kid looked down at the optical jewels on his wrist, turned his wrist:
two veins joined beneath the ham of his thumb to rUn under ,the chain.
the third tiroe somebody's asked me that. I guess I II have to
think ofa public answer. " .
Tak was talking with someone by the door: Unshaven, and a lutle
wild looking, Jack stepped in. Tak turned to the young deserter, ,,:ho
looked around, looked at Captain Kamp. Tak nodded m corroboranon
to something. Jack turned, picked up something that could have been
a gun leaning against the wall, and out. of the bar.
"I think I've figured out an answer already, KId saId.
Captain Kamp said, " ..• mmmm," and then, "so did I."
Kid grinned. "Good."
.You know-" Kamp looked down at the counter-"there are some
things I'm not happy about. But now, they're just the ,things a guy
would be reluctant to tell, ordinarily, to ... well, one of you fellows
with the shaggy hair, the funny clothes, and the beads and things. Or
chains ... " He looked up. "I am dissatisfied with my life and my work.
It's a very subtle dissatisfaction, and I don't want to told to take
and let my hair grow. I mean just the last thmg I want to hear.
Creatures of Light and Darhness 459
"Why don't you take dope and let your hair grow? See, it wasn't that
bad. Now that the wOrst has happened, maybe you can go and talk
about it. I'll just listen."
Kamp laughed. "I'm dissatisfied with my life on earth. How's that?
Notdear, I guess. Look-I'mnol the same person 1 was before I went to
the moon,-maybe this is the sort of thing you were asking about. Perhaps it's the sort ofthing that should only be told to one person. But I've
told a couple of dozen: You know the world is round, and that the moon
is a small world circliog it. But you live in a world of up and down, where
the land is a surface. But for me, just the visual continnity from that flat
surface to a height where the edge of the earth develops a curve, to where
-that curve is a complete circle, to where the little soap-colored circle
banging in front of you enlarges to the size the Earth was, and then you
come down. And suddenly that circle is a surface--but up and down is
already not quite the same thing. We danced when we got out on the
moon. What else could we do with that lightness? You know, seeing a
film backward isn't the same experience as seeiog it forward in reverse.
a new experience, still happening forward in time. What falls out is
all its own. Returning from the moon was not the same as going, played
hackward. We artived at a place where no one had walked; we left a place
where we had danced. The earth we left was peopled by a race that had
never sent emissaries to another cosmOlOgical body. We returned to a
people who had. I really feel that what we did was important-folks
starving in India notwilohstanding; and if theres a real threat of world
starvation, technology will have to he used to avoid it; and I can't think
of a better way to let people know just how far technology can take us.
I was at a point of focus, for six and a half hours. I'm happy with that
focus. But I'm not too tertibly satisfied with the life on either side. The
things that are alI are like the things alI about ,the way Bellona looked
when we were dtiving through the first day I got here: there aren't many
people, but there's no OVen signs of major destruction-.at least I didn't
see any. Its grey, and some windows are broken, and here and there are
marks of fire. But, frankly, I can't tell what's wrong. I still haven't been
able to figure out what's happened here.'
"I'd like to go to the moon.'
"Cut your hair a,ud SlOp taking dope." Kamp's 'tongue bulged his
upper lip. "You don't even have to join the services. We have civilians
in the program. Worst thing 1 could say, huh? But it really is the basic
requirement. I mean all the rest comes after that. ReaRy."
He thinks, Kid thought, he may have offended me. Kid tried not to
smile.
460 Dhalgren
"'You're frowning," Kamp said. "Come on, now. Turn abouts fair
play ... well, all right. Tell me this. Are you all that happy? Be honest
now."
Yak was ambling, slow and aimless, across the room.
"I think," and Kid felt his feelings change to fit the frown, "there's
somel!hi.ng wrong with your question, you know? 1 spend a lot ohime
happy; I spend a lot of time unhappy; I spend a lot of time just bored.
Maybe if I worked real hard at it, I could avoid some of the happiness,
but I doubt it. The other two I know I'm stuck with .. ."
Kamp was brightly attentive to something not more than a degree
or so outside of Kid's face. Well, Kid reflected, I said I'd listen. When
Kid had been silent five seconds, Kamp said:
"I'm not the same person I was before I went to the moon. Several
people have explained to me that nobody else on Earth is either. Someone told me once that I have begun to heal the great wound inflicted on
Ihe human soul by Galileo when he let slip the Earth was not the center of the Universe. No, 1 am not really satisfied now. I wonder at that
light in the sky, this afternoon. I wonder at the stories I've heard about
two moons when I know, first hand, what I do about the one. But I observe it firsl from a very different position than you. We could sit and
discuss and have conferences and semiMrs until a much more reassuring sun Came up, and I still doubt ifI could say anything meaningful
to you, oryou couldsay anything meaningful to me. At least about that."
"Hey; there.· Tak put his hand on Kid's shoulder-but was talki.ng to
Kamp: "That was my friendJack. You know, we have a good number of
army deserters with us. I told him we had a full-fledged Captain with
us this evening. He wanted to know whether you were a deserter too.
I told him that as far as I knew you were still a member in good standing. I'm afraid he just turned around and ran without even waiting to
find out you were in the Navy. Are you on your way; Captain?"
Kamp nodded, raised his bottle. "Glad I got a chance to meet you,
Kid. If I don't see you before, I'll calch you at Roger's." Again he nodded at Tak, and turned.
"I hope I make him as uncomfortable as he keeps pretending I do."
Tak sucked his teeth. "Wish he'd come in uniform. Before I went on to
more complicated pleasures, I used to have a real passion for seafood."
"You're flattering yourself."
Tak gave a few small nods. 'Possibly, very possibly. Hey; I'm sorry I
kicked you out last night. Come home with me. Fuck me."
"Naw. I'm looking for Lanya."
Creatures of Light and Darkness 461
Tak enfolded his beer with his big, pale hands and looked down the
bottle mouth. "Oh." Then he said: "Then come with me somewhere
else. I want to show you something. You probably want to see it too."
"What is it?:n I
"On the other hand, maybe you have seen it already and you're not
interested. "
"But you're not going to tell me what it is?"
"Nope."
"Come·on,71 Kid said. "Showme.D
Yak clapped Kids shoulder, then pushed away from the har. "Let's go.»
Between the buildings, black bulged down, a tarpaulin full of rain.
"This is the sort of night I'd give anything for a star. When I was
younger I used latty to learn the constellations, but I never really got
them down. 1 can find the Big Dipper." Tak opened his zipper. "Can
you do that?"
"I know them pretry well now. But 1 learned them a few years ago
when I was traveling, and on boats and stuff. They're the ani;
that the same when you're really moving around a lot. I
pIcked up thIS pocket book formty cents, when 1 was injapan-it was
an American book though. In about two weeks 1 could pick out just
about anything. "
"Mmmmm.· Tak glanced up as they neared ,me corner lamp. "Just as
well we can't see them, then. I mean, are you ready to have to learn a
whole new set?" The shadow drew over his face like ashade. "This way."
The Street sloped. At the next corner they turned again. Half a block
later Kid asked, "Can you see anything at all?"
"No."
"But you know where we're going •.. ?"
"Yes."
The smell ,of burning had again become distinct. The air was cooler, much cooler: he felt a crack in the pavement beneath his bare foot.
Something with edges rolled away from his boot. Thewoody odors "iftone instant they passed through a smell that brought back-it
hit WIth the force of hallucination: a cave in'the mountains where
something had crackled in a large, brass dish On the wet Stone, while
above he'd seen, glittering ...
The chain arouhd him tingled and tickled as though memory had
Sent current through it. But the particular odor (wet leaves Over dry
and a fire, and something decayed ... ) was gone. And cool as the
ness was, it was dry; dry ...
462 Dhalgren
Edged by a vertical wall, light a long way away diffused in smoke.
At the comer, rak looked back. "Checking to make sure you were
still with me. You don't make much noise. Were going across there."
Tak nodded forward and they crossed the street, shoulder bumping
shoulder.
Beyond plate glass, an amber light silhouetted black wire forms.
"What sort of store was this?" Kid asked, behind Tak who was
opening the door.
It sounded like a machine was rmming in the basement. Empty
shelves lined the walls, and the wire frames were display racks. The
light came from no more than a single bulb somewhere on the stair·
well. rak went to the cash register, "First time I came in here, would
you believe there was still eighry dollars in the drawed"
Takrang.
The drawer trundled out.
"Still there.'
He closed it.
In the cellar the sound stopped, then started again: only now it didn't
sound like a machine at all, but someone moaning.
"We want to go downstairs,· Tak said.
Someone had scattered pamphlets on the steps. Theywhispered under
Kids bare foOt. "What was this place?" Kid asked again. "A bookstore?"
"Still is." Tak peered out where the single. hanging bulb lit empry
shelves. "Paperback department down here."
Tacked to anedgewas ahand·letteredsigo: ITALIAN UTERATURE.
A youngster with very long hair sat cross·legged on the floor. He
glanced up, then closed his eyes, faced forward, and intoned: "Om ... "
draWing the last sound until it became the mechanical growl Kid had
heard when they'd entered.
"Occupied tonight," Tak said, softly. "Usually theres nO one here."
Between the checked flannel lapels, the boy's chest ran with sweat.
Cheek bones glistened above his beard. He'd only glanced at them, be·
fore closing his eyes again.
It's cool, Kid thought. ItS so much cooler.
Beside ITAUAN LITERATURE was POUTICAL SCIEN CEo
There were no books on that one either.
Kid stepped around the boy's knees and looked up at PHILOSOPHY
OF SCIENCE (equally empty) and walked on to PHILOSOPHY. All
the shelves, it seemed, were bare.
"Ommmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm . . ,1'1
Creatures of Light and Darkness 463
Tak touched Kid's shoulder. "Here, this is what I wanted to show
you.' He nodded across the room.
Kid followed Tak around AMERICAN UTERATURE which was
a dusry wooden rack in the middle of the floor.
The unfrosted bulb pivoted shadows about them.
"I used to come down here for all my science fiction," Tak said
"until there wasn't anything on the shelves any more. In there.
ahead."
Kid stepped into the alcove and stubbed his booted toe (thinking:
Fortunately), hopped back, looked up: The ivory covers recalled lapped
bathroom tiles.
All but the top shelf was filled with face·out display. He looked again
at the carton he had kicked. The cover wagged. As he stared into the
box, something focused: a shadow, first fallen across his mind at something Lanya had said at the nest, almost blurred out by the afternoon's
megalight, now, under the one, unfrosted bulb, lay outlined and irn:futable: As manuscripts did not become galleys overnight, neither
d.d galleys become distributed books. Many more than twenty.four
hours bad passed since he had corrected proofs with Newboy in the
church basement.
Frowning, he bent to pick out a copy. paused, reached for one on
the shelf, paused again, looked back at Tak, who had his fists in his
jacket pockets.
Kid's lips whispered at some interrogative. He looked at the books
again, reached again. His thumb stubbed the polished cover·stock.
He too\{ one.
Three fell; one slid against his foot,
Tak said: "r think it's very quaint of ·them to put it in POETRY'
which is what the sign above said. "I mean they could have filled ;p
every shelf in the God·damn store. Therere a dozen cartons in the back.·
Thumb On top, three fIngers beneath. Kid tried to feel ·the weight;
he had to jog his hand. There was a sense of absence which was easi·
est to fill with
BRASS
ORCHIDS
lettered in clean shapes with edges and serifs· his own fingers could not
have drawn, even with French curve and straightedge. He reread the
title.
464 Dhalgren
"Ommmmmmmmmmmmmmm ... ' The light blacked and went on
again; the It ••• mmmmmmmmmm ... " halted on a cough.
Kid looked over the six, seven, eight filled shelves. "That's really
funny," he said, and wished the smile he felt should be on his face
would muster his inner fealures· to the right emotions. "Thaes really
... " Suddenly he took two more copies, and pushed past Tak for the
stair. "Hey," he said to the boy. "Are you all right?"
The sweating face lifted. "Hub?"
"What's the matter you?"
'Oh, man!" The boy laughed weakly. "I'm sick as a dog. I'm really
sick as a fucking dog."
"'What's wrong?fI
"Its my gut. I got a spastic duodenum. That's like an ulcer. I mean I'm
pretty sure that's what it is. I've had it before,so I know what it feels like."
"What are you doing here, then?"
The boy laughed again. "I was trying yoga exercises. For the pain.
You know you can control things like that, with yoga."
Tak came up behind Kid. "Does it work?"
"Sometimes." The boy took a breath. "A little.'
Kid hurried on up the steps.
Tak followed.
From the top step Kid looked around at the shelves, and turned to
Tak, who said:
"I was just thinking, I really was, about asking you to autograph this
for me." He held up the copy and snorted rough laughter. "I
Kid decided not to examine the shape this thought made, but caught
the mica edge: It's not not having: It\; having no memory of having. "I
dorrt like that sort of shit anyway ... " he said, awed at his lie, and
looked at Tak's face, all shadowed and flared with backlight. He
searched the black oval for movement. res there anyway, he thought;
he said: "Here. Gimme," and got the pen from tbe vest's buttonhole.
"What are you going to do?" Tak handed it over.
Kid opened it on the counter by the register, and wrote: "This copy
of my book is for my friend, Tak Loufer." He frowned a moment, then
added, "All best." The page looked yellow. And he couldrr t read what
he'd written at all, which made him realize how dim the light was.
"Here." He handed it back. "Let's go, huh?"
"Ommmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm . . ,n
"Yeah." Tak glanced downstairs and sucked his teeth. "You know?"
They walked to the door. "When you took it from me, I thought you
were going to tear it up."
Creatures of Light and Darkness 465
laughed. Perhaps, he thought, I should have. And thinkiog it,
deCIded what he had put was best. "You know-" as they stepped into
the night, Kid felt his fingers dampen on the cover: fingerprints?-
"people talk about sexual inadequacy? That doesn't have anything to
do you can a hard-on or not. A guy goes out looking
for hIS gIrl fnend and doesn t even know where she lives, and doesn't
seem to have bothered to find out ... You said Madame Brown might
know?"
"I think so," Tak said. "Hey, you're always talking about your girl
friend. Right now, do you have a boy friend?"
Kid figured they had reached the corner. On the next step he felt
the ban of his bare foot hung over the cup. "Yeah, I guess I do." They
stepped down.
. "?h," Tak ·Somebody told me you're supposed to be making
It WIth some kid In the scorpions."
"I could get ,(0 hate this city-"
"Ah, ah, ah!" Tak's voice aped reprova!. "Rumor is the messenger of
the gods .. I'm of curious to find out what you wrote in my book.»
At whIch KId started to balk, found his own balking funny, and
smiled. "Yeah."
"And of course, the poems too. wen .. ."
Kid heard Tak's footsteps stop.
" ... I go ,this way. Sure I can't convince you . . ". ? I)
"No." He added: "But thanks. I'll see you." Kid walked forward
That's nuts. How does anybody know where anything is in
thIS, and thought that thought seven or eight times through, till, without breaking stride, he realized: I cannot see a thing and I am alone.
He pictured .great maps. of darkness torn down before more. After today,
he Idly, there IS no more reason for the sun to rise. Insanity?
To hve In any state other than terror! He held the books tightly. Are
poems mine? Or willI discover that they are improper descriptions by else of things I might have onCe been near; the map
erased, aliases substituted for each location?
Someone, then others, were laughing.
Kid walked, registering first the full wildness of it, the spreading
edges; but only at the working street lamp at the far comer realizing
it was humors raddle and play. ,
. Two black men, in the trapezoid of light from a doorway, were talklng. One was drinking a can of beer or Coke. From across the street a
third figure (Kid could see the dark arms were bare from here that the
vest was shiny) ambled up. '
466 Dhalgnm
The street lamp pulsed and died, pulsed and died. Black letters on
a yellow field announced, and announced, and announced:
JACKSON AVENUE
Kid walked toward them, curious.
"She run up here .. ." The tall one explained, then laughed once
more. "Pretty little blond-headed thing, all scared to death; you. know,
she stopped first, like she gonna turn around and run away, With her
han' up in front of her mouth. Then she a'ks me-" The man lowered!
his head and raised his voice: ·'15 George Harrison in there? You know,
George Harrison, the big colored man?'" The raconteur threw up his
head and laughed again. "Man, if I had 'em like George had 'em ... "
In his fist was a rifle barrel (butt on the ground) that swung with his
laughter. . "What you teU hed" the heavier one asked, and drank agam.
"'S1ilre he's inside,' I told her. 'He better be inside. I just come out of
there and I sure as hell seen him inside. So if he ain't inside, then I just
don't know where else he might be.'" The rifle leaned and recovered.
.She run. She just rurned around and run 0[[ down the block. Run j1ilst
like that!"
The third was a black scorpion with the black vinyl vest, his orchid
on a neck chain. It's like, Kid thought, meeting friends. ,the afternoon
the TV had been covering the assassination of another politician, the
suicide of another S1ilperstar; and for a moment you are complicit
strangers celebrating by articulate obliteration some national, neutral
catastrophe. Remembering the noon's light, Kid squinted in the dark. And
wished he were holding anything else: notebook or flower or shard of
glass. Awkwardly, he reached back to shove the books under his belt.
The three t1ilrned to look.
Kid's skin moistened with embarrassment.
" ... She just run 0[[," the black man with the gun finally repeated,
and his face relaxed like a musician's at a completed cadence.
The one with the beer can, looking left and right, said, "You scorpiOns. So you come down here a little, huh?"
"This is the Kid," the black scorpion explained. "Pm Glass."
His name, Kid tho1ilght (he remembered Spider helping with Siam's
arm on the rocking bus floor ... ): It isn't any easier to think of them
once their names surface. They might as well be me. Surfaced with it
Creatures of Light and Darkness 467
was a delight at his own lack. But that joy still seemed as dull and exas a banally Oedipal dream he'd had the first night he'd been
a5Slgned a psychiatrist at the hospital.
"You the Kid?" The man hooked the cans bottom on the top of his
belt buckle. "You fellows gonna come down here and! give us protection?"
"Yeah, they all shoo tin' up black people now, you come on down to
Jackson."
Far inside, other blacks were talking and laughing.
"What happened?" Kid asked.
Glass stepped over closer to Kid!. (Kid thought: I feel more ComHe probably does too.) The others moved to accommodate the
ShIft.
'Someone been shooting up down here?" Glass asked. "That waS
this afternoon?"
"Sure was. U The barrel went into the other hand. "Uke a you
know? Ain't that something. I mean, this afternoon, with that thlng
hanging up there.»
"What happened?"
. ·Somebody climbed up on the roof of the Second City Bank builddown on the corner, and started shooting people with a gun. Just
lIke that."
"Did he kill anybody?" Kid asked.
The man with the can pursed! his lips to a prune.
The man with the gun said: • About seven."
"Shit!» Kid said!.
"like he got fourp"ople together, you know-bip, bip, bip, bip. The
woman wasn't dead yet, but she couldn't move very far. A little later
some people came out to help them, 'cause they thought he'd gone. But
he up again and picked off three of ,them. Then he run."
It was a white boy. too.' The other gestured! with his can. "And he
gonna come aU the way down here to shoot niggers."
"The woman died, hey ... when?" Glass asked.
. • A little later. She didn't say nothing about the guy did the shootmg though: others saw. how they know he was white.' He
gnnned, fmIshed the can, tossed it. "You scorpions gonna-" it
and bounced-"gonna come down to Jackson and give us some
protectIOn? Keep them crazy white motherfuckers from shooting up
people in the street?"
The gun came up. 'We don't need no scorpion protection' and a
deprecating: "Shit." '
468 Dhalgren
"That's good: Kid said. "Because we don't protect anybody." This
all sounds sort of familiar. Didn't somebody get shot from a roof ...
The two men looked at each other, looked uncomfortable.
Glass repeated, finally, "That's not what we do."
The man with the gun slid the barrel up to his shoulder. "Naw, we
don't need no protec.tioB. n
"We don't need no motherfuckers standing on the roof of the Second City Bank building shooting people, either." The other man's
hands moved on his belt to finger the buckle, as though he WIShed the
can back. "You know; without having no doctors. Or undertakers."
"What'd they do with them?" Glass asked.
"Put them in a house way down there. And after about three orfour
days, people gonna start crossing the street when they was going past
that stretch."
The man with the gun didn't laugh. "What you scorpions doing over
here? 'Cause that sun'comes up-" the butt clacked down on the concrete---"you gonna -come on down here?"
"George told me to come down and see him, n Kid said. "I saW him
over at Reverend Amy's church and he told me to come down and
visit."
"Yeah, n Glass said. "We comin' to see George.»
After a while one said, "Oh.·
"Well
t
go on in, n .the other said. "Sure, go on inside. He's in there. II
"Come on,· Kid said to Glass.
Halfway down the haH, Glass said, "You think he ever had a .gun before? The way he was banging it around, he gonna shoot offhlS ear or
hiS nose or his head or something. n
'Or my head," Kid said. "Yeah, 1 was thinking too.'. .
Three lanterns hung together. Their magneslUm-white hl\ht
harshened the battleship linoleum, the institutional yeUow wa1ls.
Through an iron elevator gate, Kid could see a web of shadow on the
cinder block.
He knew he reacted, but CQuid not tell by what it showed. "Where
to put the bodies? I'm not going to like it when 1 run into that a third
time.tII
Glass was watching him.
"Why're you wearing your orchid around your neck? When .1
saw you the day we broke into the deparnnent store, you had It m a
piece ofleather.·
"I know;" Glass said. "But you were wearing youtS that way."
Creatures of Light and Darhness 469
"Oh. That's what I thought.'
Beyond the turn they could hear-people.
"Hey.n
Glass turned. Slabs of light slid across hiS black vinyl. "Huh?»
"What did you guys think when I showed up, 1 mean back at the
depar.tment store?:n
. Glass laughed hiS nose. He looked embarrassed. He pulled
his pants across his stomach, scratched the twice-crossed T of an appendectomy scar shOwing above his belt. His knuckles were much
darker than the rest of his skin; the places between his fingers looked
like they had been brushed with ash.
"What did yon think? Tell me." .
Glass shrugged and shook hiS head to settle the smile about the yellow of his eyes. "We ... well, we knew you were coming. Only
we dldn t know you were commg then. 1 mean, you remember the
morning we woke you up in the park?"
Kid nodded.
Glass nodded too as though the reference explained something
then looked up the hall. '
Kid walked on.
At a party, 1 hand out a hundred and fifty copies of my book, and
they all turn down the music and sit around cross-legged on the floor
reading so intently 1 can walk among them, lean down, and
each expression flickering from humor through compassion to the visage of the deeply moved.
He sweated under the books in his belt. A drop rolled, tickliog his
buttock.
Kid and Glass stepped inside the wide-swung doors.
He'd thought there was music.
• If • •• :wnts more it, can't get enough of it, how to get out of it:
Tlme- a woman cned over the loose crowd-"is the hero!' She
swayed in dark robes on some platform-or maybe just a table-that
brought her knees high as the highest, close-cropped, black (with a
brown bald spot vague in ,the middle) head. "Time is the villain!» Reverend Amy Taylor, thirty yards across the balconied hall, shook her
head and her fist, glared around at craning women and men with faces
of humus, sand, and aU in-between colOis earth can have. "Where is
this city? Struck out of time! Where is it builded? On the brink of
truths and lies. Not truth and falsity-oh, no. No. Nothing so grand.
Here we are sunk on the abyss of discrete fibs, innocent miSobserva-
470 Dhalgren
tions, brilliant speculations that turn out wrong and kill-Oh, there is
so much less truth in the universe than anything else. Yes, even here
we founder on the fill of language, the quick ash of desire." Glass
touched Kid's arm. His expression looked stranger than KidS felt.
Lanterns hung on the walls. Shadows Were multiple and dim on bloodcolored linoleum. Near them, strung crepe-paper had fallen behind the
potted ... not palms. Cactuses I 'So you have seen the mooll! So you
have seen George-the right and left testicles of God, so heavy with
tomorrow they tore through the veil to dangle naked above us all?
Then what was that in the sky today? God's womb punched inside out
and blazing with Her blood, looking like a moment ago She had passed
the egg of the earth and its polar body we've so cavalierly dismissed
from singularity? Is God a sow who devours Her young and gets heartburn? Is God the ga-rter-snake Ouroborus, gagging on the tip of His
own tail? Or is God just a category-concept mistake, like Ryle's mind,
a process the materia of the universe performs, indulges, or inflicts on
itself, through necessity or chance, for arcane reasons you alld 1 will
never discover? Being is a function of time, 'ey, Martin? Well, now,
where does that get us? Now seems pretty specious to me ... for it's
just a hole, a little hole on whose rim we've been allowed, for an eye's
blink, to perch, watching that flow, terrible for all of us, tragic for some
of us, in which the future hisses through to heap the potter's field of
the past. Very deep, indeed; and dried up. And dusty. And spiked with
bone like pongee pits. Was it a heart -of fire, up there today? Or just a
dollop of what burns, squeezed out of the cosmic gut-to its great relief! Maybe it was our sun, hurtling by, on ils way somewhere else; and
all that's left to us now is to grow colder and older, every day in every
way, gracef\llly as possible. How long did this light last? Db, my poor,
sick. doomed. and soon to be obliterated children. ask instead how long
is the darkness that follows it!'
It was not, Kid had noticed, a particularly quiet nor attentive
crowd-save the thirty or forry actually cluslered at the Reverend's
podium. People wandered, talked; and now laughter began somewhere,
obScuring her words. Up in the dark balcony. a few people, widely dis·
tant, slept like darker blotches among the brown wood seats. Somebody moved along the railing, checking spotlights; none seemed to
work. Fat, bald, the color of terra cotta and wearing just some bib-coveralls, he stood up. wiped at his forehead with the back of his artn, and
moved to the next dead light.
On the walls. were high barred windows. As Kid's eyes came down
Creatures of Light and Darkness 471
the gates, a group of six middle-aged men and women ran across the
floor: One wOman knocked over a statue that one man caught and
struggled to right, till a plaster wing fell. Plaster shattered over the
floor. Others clustered te) laugh, to shout advice.
Beyond them, R .. verend Taylor waved her arms, ducked her head
and tossed it back, harangUing the powdered floor, the shadowed ceiling; but only a word or two could tear clear now of talk and laughter.
The group fell apart from a sunburst of white footprints: George
Harrison stalked through.
One arm was around the neck of a yellow-haired, plump, pink
woman, the other around the waist of a gaunt, tan girl with a brick-colored natural and freckles. (He'd seen her, at the church, with the blond
Mexican, who had stopped him on the street, how many mornings
later, how many mornings ago?) George saw Kid, veered over, and
called: "Hey. so you goona come here. now? Shit!" His sleeves were
rolled high on biceps like French-roast coffee. "You sure pick a heU of
a time to come. Right in the middle of super-night. This is super-night,
ain't it?" and nodded and hallooed people passing ten yards away.
"Today sure as heU was super-day, When that super-sun come up in !he
super-sky! Hey-?" He released the gaunt girl's waist. Between the
lapels of her jump suit hung a glittering catenary. "What you got there?
l.emme see." His black fingers (pink nails, scimitared with yellow)
clawed up the optical chain. "I see an the people running around wearing these things. Him ... " He nodded at Kid. "You see all of them walking around with them. Come on, gimme that one. I'm gonna be a hippie too and wear them little glass beads."
·Ohh!" she complained. "George'"
"You give me -those, and you can get some more, right?"
"No honey." She lifted diem from his frogers. "You can't have these."
"Why not?"
'''Cause you can't. that's a11. 11
"You know wher .. to get them. You just give me these, and you go
get yourself-"
"Not these, honey." She shouldered back into the bend of his arm.
"You tell me what else you want and I'll give you that, okay?"
"Well, thatS what I want'"
George." She snuggled, closer-and out of his line of Sight.
"AU right, you just watch it. I may not get them now, but I'm sure
gonna get them later." Harrison gulfawed.
The gaunt girl smiled, but raised her hand where ribs and sternum
472 Dhalgren
ridged her skin, and covered the chain with her smaH, brittle-looking
palm.
"What is all this?" Kid asked. The books pressed one of the prisms
into the top of his left buttock. Uncomfortable, he shifted. The prism
dragged. "1 mean, what's everybody doing here? And the preacher-?"
"Got to give the preacher lady a place to preach!"
"She sure been going on," the gaunt girl said. "She just don't stop.'
"This here is my house," George said, with a grave nod. "Got a lot
my friends in here, you know? And you welcome, too. Any time. Got
me an apartment downstairs. Some of the rooms upstairs people done
ffXed, you know? This is the big meeting room, like. The preacher lady,
see, she figure after this afternoon, she wouldn't be able to fit 'ern all
in the church. So we say, come on and we gonna open up the big meeting room. And you just put a sign out say everybody come on over.'
"I think thatS real nice," Plump Pink said in an accent that, during
three weeks at the Georgia border loading melons, Kid had learned to
identify as South Alabama Flats. "She always preaching about George
and telling everybody about George. So 1 think it was very nice of
George to say why not come on and do it here."
"Don't look to me like there any more people than she could fit in
the chapel,' the girl said.
"We got a bar over there-• the blond woman turned up her hand
to point-"where you fellas can go get a drink. Then you can go listen
to the preacher lady. George just wants everybody to make themselves
athome.tI
"Shit,' George said. Then he laughed.
Glass laughed too; the blond woman looked satisfied, did something
with two fingers under the Dowered cotton of her bodice, smlled.
"Gatta give the preacher lady a place to preach,' George repeated.
He nodded, dropped the gaunt girl's waist.
"Who lives in this city?" Reverend Amy's voice came on through a
lull. "Logicians love it here!" George turned ,to listen. So did the gaunt
girl and Glass. "Here you can cleave space with a distinction, mark,
or token, and not have it bleed all OVer you. What we need is not a
calculus of form but an analytics of attention, which renders form on
the indifferent and undifferentiated pleroma. No, ehe, no Fanon, you
are not niggers enough! Look-" Once more she waved her fist high.
Her black sleeve. flung out below it. "I have a handful of monads here.
Listen-They're chattering and gossiping away like eight-operation
logic-cells calling up order from a random net ..•• At the mention of
Creatures of Light and Darkness 473
Che an (umelated? Kid wondered) wave of noise had started in one
corner of the hall. Now another, which had at its center crashiag bottle glass, rose over her voice. On the brown scope of the Reverend's
face, a constellation of droplets gleamed on each temple. Her mouth
moved, her head benl, her head rose; her eyes sealed, snapped open,
stared intently; and again Kid could hear none of her dithyramb.
He did hear George chuckle. Harrison stood with his hands in the
pockets of his dirty khaki slacks.
Glass, a few steps away; was craning to see something over somebody's head. The blond woman was shouldering her way forward with
stoiles and "excuse-me's, n right and left; the gaunt girl stood, pensive,
still watching the preacher, her left hand on her right shoulder, looking pained and piCturesque.
"You know your girl friend was outside looking for you agaia," Kid
said.
'Yeah?" George said. "Which one?"
"A little blond seventeen-year-old white girl. D The sweat, Kid reat..
ized, was not just under the books. The shoulders of his vest slid on it.
The backs ·ofhis knees and the skin under his jaw were wet. "She was
outside, asking ... askiag for you: 'Is George Harrison in there? Is
George inside?UI
George's nose and cheeks like sanded teak, his heavy lips wrinkled
as hemlock bark, the planes around his Off-ivory teeth and eyes moved
into an expression fixed loosely among irony, amusement, and contempt: It was the eXpression on Tak's first poster. "Lots of little white
girls COme around here looking for me. "
"Her name rhymes with moon, andshe-" Kid's right fist clamped,
fingertips and knuckles scraping his jeans-'she killed her brother for
you: George? She had your poster, all big and black and naked and he
saw it, her little brother. He saw it and was teasing her-you know how
little brothers are, George? He was teasing her and he was gonna teB
on her, you see? He was gonna tell her mother, tell her father: only she
was afraid if he did, they'd know-know that it wasn't just a picture;
know that she'd found you once; know that she was trying to find you
again. See, they'd already threatened to kill her older brother. Already.
And he'd run away. $0 she pushed him, her little brother, down the elevator shaft-sixteen, seventeen, eighteen stories down ... ! I don't
quite ... remember!· Kid shook his head. Something that was not pain
pulsed in it, pulsed in it again. "Oh, Ghrist, there was ... blood! I had
blood all over me. I had to pull him out of the basement, by the arm-
474 Dhalgren
£ul! And carry him back upstairs. After he was dead. But ... it Was for
you! Thafs why she ... why she did it! That's why I ... ' What
pulsed became pain. "She told me herself. She told me that she Was
afraid he was going to tell. And that she ... ' Kid stepped away, steppet!
again, because the first step was unsteady and he had to catch himself
on the second. He looked back.
George watched, as if from a long hall whose walls moved With in.
different faces, black and brown.
His eyes will explode like blooming poppies, Kid thought. His teeth
will erupt like diamonds spat by the mouthfuls. His tongue Will snake
the yards between us, nearly touch my mouth before it becomes pink
smoke. Steam in two colUmns Will hiss down from his nostrils •..
George stared With-and recognizing it, Kid suddenly turned away,
lurched away-the indulgence reserved for the mad.
Is this, Kid ,thought (saying, "Hey, I'm sorry, man ... ' and patting
someoneS shoulder he'd just bumped), one of those moments that, mo.
mentarily, will slip out of mind to join my purpose, age, and name? He
made it between those two; then somebody, laughing, steadied his arm
and handed him on. He came up against the thin metal bars With his
cheek and both hands, clutched them, leaned back, looked up:
Someone was coming down the spiral stairway. The fat, bald man
(whose skin looked now more like oiled wrapping paper) in the bib·
overalls descended, by Kid, stepped from ringing, black, triangular
steps that circled the central pole, up around, and up through the open
square in the balcony floorWhen Kid looked down again, the man was working Sideways
through the people wandering about the center of the room.
"You all right?"
"Yeah, I .... Kid looked around.
"Good." Glass, With a bobbing walk, almost slow motion, came toward him. "I was just wondering. You know •.• ?"
"I'm all. right ... " But he was cold; the sweat was drying on his neck,
his forearms, his ankles. "Yeah."
Glass Ian his thumb along his belt. Vmyl flapped back from the appendectomy scar in his dark, matte skin, swung over it again.
Multiple Caucasian laughter fei down through the spiral railing.
Glass and Kid looked up together, looked down together.
A lantern high on wall brushed soft highlights on Glass's arms,
slapped harsh ones On his vest, and slipped a line of light along an orchid petal against his cha-ined and chaon-lapped chest so bright Kid
sqUinted.
Creatures afLight and Darkness 475
IJYou wanna go see?D Glass said.
'Sounds like the kids from the park." Kid pressed his lips, glanced
up again; suddenly he swung around the mil, started up the steps, one
hand on the gritty pole, one trailing on the banister. Glass, behind him,
kept bumping Kid's fist with his fist on the rail. The toe of his boot
caught Kid's bare heel one step before the top.
From the shadowed kiosk at the head of the aisle, Kid looked down
the balcony's mked seats. He heard Glass breathing inches behind his
eal'S.
They sat-six, no seven of them-just back from the balcony rail:
The blond woman in the third row; leaning forward to see between the
shoulders of the two men in front, was Lynn, the woman he had sat
next to at the Richards, the woman from whom he had wrested the gun
in the Emboriky.
A tall, curly-haired man sat beside her, his hands locked around the
barrel of a rifle. He leaned forward, the barrel tip higher than his head;
he looked almost asleep.
Another man was still laughing.
Another was saying, "Where is that damn woman's dog? Hey-" He
half rose, looked over the empty seats: "Muriel! Muriel-"
'Oh, for God's sakes, Mark, sit down!" Lynn, in her green dress, said.
Another man, in a worn suede jacket, said: "r want to know where
that damn woman is. She was supposed to be back ... " The last of his
sentence was lost in laughter and applause from Delow; that must have
had something to do With the Reverend; but Kid could not see her from
here.
And one man had -cuffed the man next to him. The other woman,
in an off-the-shoulder peasant blouse, was trying to separate them,
laughing.
A seat away, scuffed shoes on the back of the seat ahead, knees jackknifed in shiny slacks, and a rifle across his chair arms like a guard bar
on the seat of a carnival ride, sat Jack. While the others joked and
laughed, Kid could see his hollow; unshaven cheek pulse With swallOWing as he balanced his chin on his joined fists and brooded down
on the milling blacks.
"Ain't some of those guys look awfully familiar?" Glass whispered,
too loudly, it seemed, near Kid's ear. But none of them turned.
Kid glanced back-"The department store ... "-and saw Glass nod
before he looked away.
Widely scattered in the dark balcony (there were only two lanterns
that someone had set up about twenty yards down the balcony rail; all
476 Dhalgmt
the other light came from below), perhaps a dozen people lounged in
the ply-backed seats .• he bolts in the wrought metal braces holding
the seat, in front of Kid's knee, to the dusty floor were half out-
"Whats she saying? Can you hear what the preacher ladys saying
down there?"
"Oh, come on! You can't hear anything up here except noise! I want
to go downstairs and wander around ,the party!"
'You want to go down ,there, with all·ofthem? Go on, then!"
"That guy down there looks all right ... Who is he, anyway?"
"The white guy aver there?"
"ThaIS who I was pointing at, wasn't H"
"Man-" The curly-haired one dragged the barrel back against Iris
chest. "We could really JUS! pick them off from here. Just like-" He
suddenly raised Iris rille to his eye. "Pow!" he said, then glanced over
and laughed. "Just like that, right? Wish I knew which one was George
Harrison." He down the gun again. ·Pow ... " he whispered.
"Cut it out," the man who was Mark said. "We just snuck in here to
see what was going on.»
.he curly-headed man leaned forward and called, "Hey, Reb? Don't
you think We could stir up a little excitement down there with a few
well-aimed ones--just for target practice, mind you? What you think
ofthat idea, Reb?"
Jack said, soberly and not looking over: "All you folks got some
strange ideas. Everybody 1 met siOlce 1 come here got strange ideas."
Not soberly, came to Kid as a second thought: Jacks voice had the
slurred gravity of a very grave drunk.
·Why do you two want to bring guns to a place like this for anyway?" Mark said.
"They had guns," the curly-headed man said, puttiog his rille butt
back on the floor. "You see the way them niggers tried to kick us out,
because we had guns? Now that's not right. They had guns, we had
guns-all men are created equal. Didn't you know that?-Hey, get your
hand am"
"I just wanted to see it," the woman in the peasant blouse said. "Besides, I'm a better shot than you, anyway."
"Yealt?"the man said. "Sure you are.' He hung his curly head back
against the barrel.
"Well, 1 am!"
"Which one is Harrison?" one of the other men said. "You know,
they all do look alike." He laughed. "At least from up her .. "
Creatures of Light and Darkness 477
Jack put One shoe down. Other than tbat-elbows on the chair, arms
across his rille, chin on his fists, and one shiny knee angling widehe did not move.
"What is that woman shouting about down there? Jesus ... "
Kid looked at Glass, who had stepped up beside him now. Glass,
frowning, glanced back at the small group, with a small, disgusted head
shake.
Kid gestured down the spiral steps with his chin, turned, and started.
The hall of milling men and women revolved and received him.
"Too much!" Glass said at the bottom, stopping Kid with a warm
hand on the shoulder. "I mean, Christ, man ... "
":l..et's find George.' Kid took a breath. "We'l! tell him they're up
there and see what he wants to do.'
"They probably ain't really gonna do nothing ... " Glass said, warily.
"Then we find George, tell him theres a bunch of white people up
in the balcony, two of them with guns, who probably ain't gonna do
anything." Kid wondered which way to go, saw an opening in the
crowd, and loped into it.
Behind him, Glass suggested on the run: "Maybe George already
knows they're there?"
"Fine," Kid said, back over his shoulder. "Then he can tell us that
toO.D
Three tubs near the wall held the four- and five-foot cactuses-the
sort Kid had always heard sent roots thirty and forty feet down into
the desert for water.
On the nearest, among browned and crisscrossed needles, hung
what looked like a pink tissue. Two steps nearer, and Kid saw it was
the rag of a flower, wide as his hand, limp on the succulent's Ilesh.
Before the furthest, George joked among a loud and jocular group.
One woman with arms like brown sacks, wrinkled at elbows, wrists,
and knuckles, waved a bottle, offering it here and there, with kisses
and explosive shrieks.
Kid glanced at the balcony. No, they were not visible from where he
stood.
Kid edged forward into the group. An arm pressed his arm, a hand
steadied against his baCK to steady someone unsteady: He was sweating again. "George-l Hey; George?" He wondered why, and for answer
found all the memories of len minutes agos encounter: Ihe compulsive
tale of June, his own terror, returning now. "George, 1 got to-" He
took the bottle passed him, drank, passed it on. "George, I got to see
478 Dhalgren
you for a minute, malil" Am 1 afraid of him? Kid wondered. If thats all
it is, then aliI know to do is not be afraid of the fear. "George ... I"
Harrison had the bottle now. His arm rose, his laughter fell-"Hey
now, how you doing, Kid? This here is the Kid. The Kid wants to speak
to me for a second-" then the arm fell around Kid's shoulder-'so I'll
be with you in a minute." The dark lowered next to Kid's with an
anticipatory swig, fixing attention.
"!..oak," Kid said. "Outside, there was some guy talking about some
people getting killed in the street by snipelS from the roof this afternoon?
Well, up in the balcony, you got about half a dozen white guys-two of
them with guns. They're sitting there joking about picking people off.
And they're particularly interested in which one is you. Now they probahly aren't gonna pull anything, but 1 thought you ought to-"
·Shill" George hissed. He raised his eyes, but not his head. "They
got three women and a dog with them-?"
"Two ... " Kid be.gan. "No, three and a dog."
"God-damn thick-headed niggersl" Georges breath lurched in
sharply. "I told them not to let them crazy people in here with no gunsl
What the hell they think 1 put them out there for _ .. unless they done
snuck in some other way_I!
"That's what they were saying," Kid said. "They must of snuck in.
And-"
George started to stand.
Kid caught his shoulder and pulled him back down, his mind gone
bright with recognition .of what waS inside of it: "-and Georgel What
I told you-"the sweat started to dry, and as his back cooled under his
vest, he knew why it had come-"aboutjune, killing her brother ... 1"
George's eyes, the corners blood-heavy, the pupils fading almost
evenly into the staine!l,.ivory whites, came dose to Kid's.
" ... it wasn't true. 1 mean, she did it. But you see, 1 don't know
whether she did it because of you or not. After he was killed, thats
when she told me he was going to tell, aboutlhe poster of you 1 gave
her. She said it was an accident. She said he was going to tell, and then,
just by accident. .. So 1 don't know. You see ... ?"
"You real worried about thaI, ain't you?" George straightened. His
arm still· hung on Kid's shoulder, the glass bottle moving, as George
breathed, against Kid's chains. "Well thats why she looking for me, not
you. 'Cause 1 don't care about that one way Or the other. You so busy
blamin' or forgivin', you gonna drive her crazy. Me, see, 1 don't care if
she innocent as a little white bunny rabbit in a brand new hutch, or if
Creatures of Light and Darhness 479
she done killed her brother, her mother, her daddy, and the President
of the United States, Cut up the bodies, and danced naked in the blood.
What's it to me? What's it to her-? Another white man out of the way,
that's all. She might worry about it a bit more than I do, but not much.
And, finally, it's just gonna make both our lives easier-maybe even
yours. When she come to me, 1 do her just the same, both ways. You
say she looking? Well, I'm here, man, I'm still here. Hey_In which was
called out across the crowd. George waved the bottle high. "We all getting tired out, now. 1 think we got to all think about gOing home."
The blades clicked on Kids chest, turned. Kid said: "You want us to
go up and get 'em down for you. George? We'll take them out of the
balcony."
George looked back at Kid, hesitated with narrowed eyes. "We get
my boys up there to cover them. Then we get some people to take them
away. My boys let them get in. So they Can get them out. 1 know you
guys is pretty handy with them bunch of thorns hanging around your
necks, but they got equalizelS, and if all men is created equal, we might
as well keep it that way. Party's been going on too long, anyway. We all
gonna go home nOW. So you can oblige me by moving out too, okay?"
Kid grinned, aped an over-polite bow-
"Much obliged to you, there," George said. "For all your trouble"-
and laughed. Kid looked at the cactus in its wooden tub: for a moment
he considered thrOwing himself against it to embrace the spiked, fleshy
trunk; which was so ridiculous he merely turned and wa·lked away.
They will meet, he thought, by sun, by moons, by laughter or lightning. Why I sweat is because 1 do not know what will happen to me,
then. What will happen to me ...
Glass fell in beside him.
After aboutsix steps, Glass said: "What would you have done if he'd
said, 'Why, sure, manl Go on up there and bring the motherfuckers
down'?"
"Probably-" Kid dodged a dtunk who was going to fall three steps
beyond them-"pissed all over myself.'
"Maybe." Glass laughed. "But then, you'd probably of tried to go up
there and get 'em down, too.'
"1 don't think they'd have. been much trouble,' Kid said. "I hope."
The White man coming toward them, shouldering through the
blacks and smiling, was Captain Michael Kamp. ''Well, hello, there.
Now 1 didn't think 1 was going to see you again. 1 mean, not this
evening.' His smile took in Glass.
480 Dhalgren
"Hello, sir," Kid said. "Good to see you again. But 1 think the partys
breaking up. They got some problem upstairs. Nothing serious. But
there just might be some shooting. And its awfully easy pickings from
up there." Kamp's eyes followed Kid's up to me balcony and came back,
confused and half again as wide. Kidsaid, "Oh. This is my friend Glass.
Glass. this is Captain Kamp."
"Hello, sir. n Glass put out his hand. "Glad to meet you. n
Kamp had to remember to shake. "What is ... 1 mean?"
"Come Oll, in" Kid said. "Lets move over this way.lI
going on now?" Kamp followed them. "Now; well ... Roger
gave me a list of places to hit this evening. I'm afraid I'm on7 of
guys who likes to drink booze and chase women-the Navys favonte
kind. While that bar is all very interesting-a very interesting bunch-"
he nodded-"really, 1 thought 1 might do better, at least on the second
part of that, some place else. Like here." He looked up at the balcony
again, while a sudden mass of people moved noisily toward the door
and out. "They got some pretty women, too ... " Another bunch followed them. "What is it?" Kampasked.
"Some crazy white folks with guns," Kid said. "They aren't doiog
anything but making people nervouS. But they shouldn't be up there,
anyway." "Didn't 1 hear somebody sayiog somethiegabout people getting shot
in the street this afternoon?"
'Yeah," Glass said, and grimaced .
• Oh," Kamp said, because he could apparently thiok of nothiog else.
"Roger said they didn't even let white people in this place. What a·re
they doing here?"
Kid frowned a moment at Kamp. "Well, some of us get by."
• Ob," Kamp said again. "Well, sure. 1 mean .• ."
'You from the moon, ain't you," Glass said. "Thats prettyioteresting."
Kamp started to say somethiog, but a voice-it was the Reverend's--
came through the half-silence that followed the exodus:
" ... of the crossing taken again is not the value of the crossing? Oh,
my poor, ioaceurate hands and eyes! Don't you know that once you
have transgressed that boundary, every atom, ·Ihe interior of every pOint
of reality, has shitted its relation to every other you've left behind, shaken and jangled within the field of time, so that if you cross back. you
return to a very ·different space from the one you left? You have crossed
the river to come to this city? Do you really think you can crOSS back
to a world where a blue sky goes violet in the evening, buttered over
Creatures of Light and Darkness 481
with the light of a Single, silver moon? Or that after a breath of dark
presaged by a false, familiar dawn, a little disk of fire will spurt,
ting light, over trees and sparse clouds, women, men, and works of
hand? But you do! Of course you dol How else are we to retain the inflationary coinage and cheap paper money of sanity and solipsism? Oh,
it is common knowledge, the name of that so secondary moon that iotruded itself upon our so ordinary night. But the arcane and unspoken
name of what TOse on this so extraordinary day, for which George is
only consort, that alone will free you of this city! Pray with me! Pray!
Pray that this city is the one, pure, logical space from which, without
being poet or a god, we can all actually leave if-what?" Someone
reached up to her: the Reverend looked down. "What did ... ?" It was
George. The Reverend bent. For a moment she started to look up, did
not, and hastily climbed from her platform. Her small head was lost
among the heads around her.
"Well, 1 guess about time for me to get up to Rogers then. n Kamp
looked around. "Though they have some pretty nice-looking ladies
around, I must admit. n
"Guess timdor us all to get going," Kid said, and noticed Kamp
did not move. He tried to glance in the direction Kamp looked, won.
dering which lady his eyes had cOme to rest on, found only the blank,
barred window.
Kamp said: "Urn . .. Getting up to Rogers in the dark .... He shifted his weight, put his one hand in his slacks pocket. "I don't really
enjoy the idea." He shifted back. "Say, you guys want a job?"
IoIHuh.?n
"Give you five bucks if you walk me up to the house-you know
where it is?"
Kid nodded .
"I mean, you guys are in the protection business, aren't you? l'djust
as soon have some, walkiog around this town at night."
"Yeah?"
"Walking around the streets io the dark, in a city with no police,
you don't know what you're going to fmd ... both of you: I'll give you
five apiece. tI
"I'll go with you," Glass said.
"We'll go,» Kid said.
"I really appreciate that, noW; I really do. I don't want to rush you
out. If you want to stay around and have a couple more drinks, fine.
Just let me know when you're ready-"
482 Dhalgren
Glass looked at Kid with a sort of Is-he-crazy? look.
So Kid said, "We'Ugo now," and thought: Is he that much more terrified of the dark than known danger?
"Good; Kamp said_ "Okay. Fioe, now." He grinned and slarted for
the crowded door.
Glass's expression was still puzzled.
"Yeah,' Kid said. "Hes for real. He's been to the moon."
Glass laughed without openiog his lips. "I'm for real too, man." And
then he clapped his hands.
Kamp looked back at them.
Kid, followed by Glass, shouldered through the bunch milliog loudly
at the exit.
In the hallway, Kamp asked, "Do you fellows-you're scorpions,
now, right?-do you fellows have much trm,ble around here?"
"Our share," Glass said.
Kid thought: Gla$s ,always waits before he speaks as if it were my
place to speak first.
"I'm not the sort of man who usually runs from a fight, n Kamp said,
"But, now, you don't set yourself up. I'm not carrying a lot of money,
bl'lt I want to get home with what I've got." (People before the door
listened ,to a woman who, io the midst of her story, stopped to lal'lgh
torrentially.) "If I'm going to stay in Bellona for a while, maybe >t
wOl'lld be a good idea to hire a bunch of you guys to hang around with
me. Then again, maybe that would just be attracting attention. Now,
I reaUy do appreciate YOH commg with me."
"We won'! let anything happen to you; Kid said and wondered
why.
He contemplated telling Kamp his fear was silly; and realized his
own nether consciousness had grown fearful.
Glass settled his shoulders, and his chio, and his thumbs in his
frayed pockets, like a black, drugstore cowboy.
"You'll be okay," Kid reiterated.
The woman recovered enough for the story's punchline, which was
" •.. the sun! He said it was the God-damn sun!" Black men and women
rocked and howled.
Kid laughed too; they circuited the group, into the dark.
"Did you talk to George when you were inside?" Glass asked.
'We sort of talked. He <:>ffered me one of his girlfriends. But she just
wasIl'l my type, now: Now ifhe'd olfered me the other one ... " Kamp
chuckled.
Creatures of Light and Darkness 483
"What'd you thiok of him?" Kid asked.
"He isn't so much. I mean, I don't know why everybody is so scared
of him."
"Scared?lI
"Roger's terrified," Kamp said. "Roger was the one who told me
about him, of Course. It's an ioteresting story, but it's strange. What do
youthiok?"
Kid shrugged. "What's there to say?"
"A great deal, from what you hear.'
On the brick wall, beneath the pulsing streedamp, George's posters,
as shiny as if they had been varnished, overlapped like the immense
and painted scales ofa dragon, flank fading olf and up iota night. Glass
looked at them as they passed. Kid and Kamp glanced at Glass.
"From what I've gathered, now, everybody spends a great deal of
time talking about him.·
"What did you two talk about, beside swapping pussy?" Kid asked.
"He mentioned you, among other things."
·Yeah? What did he say?"
"He wanted to know if I'd met you. When I said I had, he wanted
to know my opinion of you. Seems people are almost as interested in
you as they are in him."
That seemed like somethiog to laugh at. Kid was surprised at Kamp's
silence.
Dark pulled over Kamp's face. "You know, there:. something-well,
I'm not a strictly religious man. But I mean, for instance. when we were
up there and we read the bible to everybody on television, we meant
it. There's something about naming a new moon, for somebodysomebody like that, and all that sort of now, it's agaiost religion.
I don't like it.»
Glass chuckled. "They ain't named the sun yet."
Kamp, baffled by Glass's accent (by now Kid had set it somewhere
near Shreveport), made him say that again.
·Oh," Kamp said when he understood. "Oh, you mean this afternoon."
"Yeah," Glass said. "I hope you don't thiok they gonna name it after
you?" and chuckled on.
"You think you could live up to that?" Kid asked.
Kamp gestured in the dark. But they could not teil the curve of his
arm, whether it were closed or open-handed, So lost the meaning. "You
fellows know where we're gOing, now?"
484 Dhalgren
"We're going right," Glass said.
Kid felt distincl1ytheywere going wrong. But distrust of his distinct
feelings had become second nature. He walked, waiting, beside them.
"See," Glass said, surprising Kid from his reverie, maybe twenty
minutes later, "This is that place between Brisbain North and Brisbain
South. Told you we're going right. •
Two canyon walls collapsed inward upon one another, obliterating
the time between.
"What?" asked Kamp.
"We're going right," Glass said. "Up to Mr. Calkins'."
Lamps on three consecutive corners worked.
They squinted and blinked at one another after blocks of darkness.
"I guess," Kamp said, jocularly, "it must be pretty hard for anybody
to navigate after dark in the city.'
"You learn," Kid said.
"What?'II
What sort of accent do I have? "I said 'You learn."
"Oh.'II
Ahead, black was punctured by a streetlamp at least five blocks off,
flickering through branches of some otherwise invisible tree.
"You fellows ever have any trouble on the street?"
"Yeah," Kid said.
"What part of the city," Kamp asked. "You know, I want to know
what neighborhoods to stay out of. Was it over where we were? The
colored area,jackson?"
"Right outside of Calkins',» Kid said.
"Did you get robbed?"
"No.1 was just minding my own business. Then this bunch of guys
jumped out and beat shit out of me. They didn't have anything better
to do, I guess.»
"Did you ever find out who it was?"
"Scorpions," Kid said. (Glass chuckled again.) "But that was before
I started running."
"Scorpiolis are about the only thing in Bellona you got to worry
about," Glass said. "Unless it's some nut with a rifle in an upstairs window or on the roof who decides to pick you off.'
"-because he doesn't have anything better to do," Kid finished.
Kamp took a breath inth. dark. "You say the neighborhood up here,
around Rogers, is really bad?"
"About as bad as anyplace else," Kid said.
Creatures of Light and Darhness 485
"Well,' Kamp reflected, "I guess it was a pretty goodjdea to get you
guys to come up with me, now."
He is using his rear to use me, Kid reflected, and said nothing. Ten
for the Kid wondered how much this paralleled the gen-
.of the protection in the park Commune. He put his fingertips
In his pockets, hunched hIS shoulders, grinned at the night and thought:
Is this how a dangerous scorpion walks? He swung his steps a bit wider.
Kamp coughed, and said very little for the next quarter-hour.
. .. am a marauder in the internal city, tenuous as the dark shaken
on itself with a footstep, eyeblink, heartbeat. Intrigued by the way his
fear has given me purpose, I swagger down the labyrinth of least resistance. (Where is the sound?) There is a sound like glass and sand,
or a finger turning in the channels of the ear. I acknowledge my own
death with an electrified tongue, wanting to cry. These breaths I leave
here disperse like apparitions of laughter I am too terrified to release.
Which was the conclusion of the reverie he'd begun before: but
could not remember its beginning.
"Do you know how far along the wall here the gate is?" Kamp asked.
"The wall makes your voice sound funny in the dark, don',t it?"
Glass said.
"Won't we be able to see some ligbt from the house?" Kamp asked.
Kid asked: "They still got light?"
They walked.
"There," Kid said. "I see something-' stumbling at the curb edge.
" ... hey, watch-!" but did not fdl. He recovered to Kamps nervous
laugh. He thinks, Kid thought, something almost jumped out at us.
Only my eyes are bandaged in darkness. The rest of my body swerves
in light.
"Yes, 'II Kamp said. "We're here. n
Between the newels, through the brass bars and shaggy pine, light
slid into the crevices of Glass's face (sweating; Kid was surprised) and
dusted Kamp's that was simply very pale.
r thought I was the only one scared to death, Kid thought. My luck,
on my dumb face it doesn't show:
"jose," Kamp called. "jose, its Mike Kamp. I'm back for the night.
jose,' Kamp explained somewhat inanely, "is the man Roger has on the
gate."
K-h-hlank: the lock (remotely controlled?) opened and bars swung
inches in.
"Well," Kamp put his hands iD his pockets. "I certainly waDt to
486 Dhalgren
thank you guys for--Oh." His hands came out. "Here you go." He riffled through his wallet, held it up to his eyes. "Got to see what I have
here, now ... " He took out two bills.
Glass said, "Thanks," when he got his.
"Well," Kamp said again. "Thanks again. Well now. If I don't see you
before, Kid, I'll see you in three Sundays." He pushed the gate. "Do you
fellows want to come--IJ
"No,· Kidsaid, and realized Glass had gotten himself ready to say yes.
"All right.' K-k-hlanh. "Good night now."
Glass shifted from one foot to the other. "Night." Then he said:
"Those curbs are too much in all dark shit. Let's go down the
middle of the street."
"Sure.'"
They stepped off the sidewalk and smIted back.
You'll get to see what it looks like inside in a couple of weeks, Kid
thought of saying and didn't. He also thought of asking why Glass was
a scorpion, how long he'd been, and what he'd done before.
They did not talk.
Kid constructed the stumps .of a dozen conversations, and heard
each veer into some mutually embarrassing area, and so abandoned it.
Once it occurred to him Glass was probably indulging in the same
process: for a while he pondered what Glass might want to koowabout
him: that too became fanmsized converse and, like the others, embarrassing. So their silent intercourse moved to another subject.
"All this walking ain't worth five bucks," Glass said at the NorthSouth connection.
"Here." Kid held out his bill, crumpled by the time in his fist (the
crisp points had blunted with perspiration). "It probably ain't worth
ten either. But I don't need it."
"Thanks," Glasssaid. "aey, thanks, man."
He was both surprised and amused that the interchange released
him [rom his preoccupation with who Glass was.
They ambled the black street into the dty. neither mOving to illuminate his projector, in memoriam-Kid realized-to the sun.
How long had they been? Three hours? More? The dismnce between
then and nOw was packed full of time during which his furious mind
had prodded the outsides of a myriad fanwies and (if he were asked
he would have said) nothing had happened. Thoughts of madness: Perhaps those moments of miscast reality or lost time were the points
(during times when nothing happened) when the prodding broke
Creatures of Light and Darkness 487
through. The language that happened on other muscles than the
tongue was better for grasping these. Things he could not say wobbled
in his mouth, and brought back, vividly in the black, how at age four
he had sat in the cellar, putting into his mouth, one after the other,
blue, orange, and pink marbles, to see if he could mste the colors.
They passed another lamp.
Glass!; face was dry.
The way anywhere in this city was obviously to drift; Kid drifted,
on kinesthetic memory. To try conSCiously for destination was to come
upon street signs illegible through smoke, darkness, or vandalism,
wrongly placed, or missing.
When they crossed Jackson, Kid asked, "I want to go back to the
party."
"Sure, motherfucker." Glass grinned. "Why not? You reaIlywaot to?"
':Just to see what happened.'
Glass Sighed.
Across the pavement, at the ather end of the block, Kid saw the dim
trapezoid "Light's still on."
Of the cluster of three lanterns inside the door, one still burned. Inside, the doors to the hall were closed
"Don't sound like nobody\; there."
"Open the door," Kid said because Glass was ahead of him.
Glass pushed, stepped in; Kid stepped after.
Only t,,:o lanterns were working: a ,third, in the corner, guttered. The
meetiog room was empty; the party:' detritus lay in ruin and shadow.
Near the one-winged smtue, fallen among the prickly plants, the tip
of the barrel on his belly, the butt on the linoleum, the black guard whom
they had talked to outside lay on his back and snored. The tracked
.overturned chairs, and scattered bottles momentarily brought
KId an unage of a drunken shooting, the barrel swinging arouod the
rOom moments before he'd passed out-but he saw no bullet holes.
He could see no one in the balcony.
On a chair by the far wall, mumed in an absurd overcoat, the only
other person in the room swayed to one side, froze, recovered, swayed
once more, once more froze at an angle that challenged gravity.
"What does he have inside him, a gyroscope?" Glass asked.
"More like half a spoon of skag. "
Glass laughed.
In the hallway, a door that had been closed before now stood on
asmirwell.
488 Dhalgren
'You wanna go exploring?" Glass asked.
'WSure, 1l Kid said.
Glass pinched at his broad nose, twice, sucked in both lips, <:leared
his throat, and sfarced down.
Kid followed.
A door at the bottom was opeD. Kid's foot crushed a TImes, which
caught some low draft (the dirty stair was cold: the banister pipe warml
and drifted down. It rasped again beneath his boot on the last step.
Kid came up behind Glass in the doorway:
The couch had been opened into a bed. The gaunt, brick-haired girl
who had been with George, her neck looped with the optical chain,
slept beneath a rumpled blanket, baring small, light-coffee breasts,
dolloped with dark nipples.
A lamp by the bed had a shade of glass from which a triangle was
broken away. The wedge of light, molding to body and bedding, just
touched one aureole .at the height of her blowy breath.
"Hey. man!" Glass whispered, and grinned.
Kid breathed with her, swaying on the bottom step, and had to
move his feel apart.
"How'd you like some of thaO"
"r think r could eat about three helpings," Kid said. "Where's
George?"
"Man, he probably gone off with the other one-" Glass's emphatic
whispers broke into and returned from falsetto.
Then: "What the fuck are you doingl" She sat up, sharply. face going
from sleep to anger like two frames of film.
"Jesus Christ, lady." Kid said, "we were just looking."
"Well stop looking! Go on, get the fuck out of herel Where the hell
is everybody? You, both of y,ou, get outl"
"Sweetheart, don't go on like that," Glass said. "Now you got your
door wide opea-"
"Did that nut leave the damn door unlocked-" She pulled up the
sheet, reached downlly the bed, and whipped up some article of clothing. "Come OR. Out! Out! Outl fm not kidding. Out!·
"l.ook-" Kid glumly contemplated the difficulties of rape (a surprising memory of his arms filled with the bloody boy; he moved his
feet backtogetherl and wondered what Glass was contempJating-"if
you just stop yelling, maybe we caa discuss this a little; you might
change your mind-"
"Not on your fucking life!" She shook out the wrinkled jump suit,
Creatures oj Light and Darkness 489
swung her legs off the bed, and stuck her feet in. "I don't know what
you got on your mind to do. But if you try it, you gonna get your ass
hurt! n
"Nobody wants to hurt anybody-" Kid stopped because Glass was
looking up at the small, high window. Kid felt his cheeks wrinkling and
the pressure of surprise on his forehead.
She started to say something, and then said, "Huh?"
The foggy air outside had lightened to blue.
Then Glass turned and ran up the stairs.
"Hey!" Kid followed him.
Behind, he could hear her fighting with shoes.
Kid ran down the hall, swung outside.
Glass, a dozen feet from the sidewalk, stared along the street.
Kid joined him, stopping to look back, at the sound of footsteps:
She stopped at the edge of the door, leaned out, her face contorted.
"Jesus God,' she said softly. stepped out and raised her head. " ... it's
getting ... light!"
Kid's first thought was: Its happening too fast. The uneven roofs descended in a paliRg V. vertex blurred with smoke. He stared, waiting
fQr an eruption of bronze fires. But no; the arch of visible sky, though
modeled and mottled with billows, was deep blue, except the lowest
quarter, gone grey.
·Oh, man!" Glass looked at Kid. "I'm so tired." Below one eye, water
tracked his dark cheek. Blinking, Glass turned back to the morning.
Kid got chills. And kept getting them. 1 don't trust this reaction, he
thought, remembering the last late-night TV drama where ,the frail
heroine's tearful realizations of burgeoaing love had caused him the
same one. I'm going on like this because there's a nigger next to me
about to bawl, and another in the doorway who looks so scared and
confused I'm about to ... No, it's not Ihe light. No.
But the chills came on, frazzling his flesh, till even his thoughts Stuttered. Chills sandpapered his spine. His palms hummed. He opened his
mouth and eyes and his fmgers wide to the raddled and streaming dawn.
5
Sunday. Aprill, 1976-There is reason to speak of this on page two
rather than lend the phenomenon the leading headline it could so easily claim. We, for one, are just not ready to grant the hysteria prevailIng beneath this miasmal poUutioa the reinforcement of our shock.
490 Dhalgren
We saw this one ourselves.
But in the city where we live, one doubts even the validity of that
credential.
We went so far as to entertain awhile the idea of devoting this issue
to accounts only by those who had slept through, who were busy in
the cellar or windowless back room when, or-hope on hope-could
claim to have been strolling about yesterday afternoon and observed
during, nothing extraordinary in the sky.
But if the advent in our nights of George is anything to go by, we
should have to look outside our misty and deliquescent city limits to
find a negative witness. At least we hope so.
Please, return to page one. The plight of Jackson's Lower Cumberland area, where apparently all power has gone out with the breaking
of the water main on my last Thursday (how dangerous that is for the
rest of us nobody can say because nobody can estimate the losses from
the fractured dam in terms of our decreased population), is a real
dUemma. More real, we would like to feel, than yesterday's portent.
We are not anxious either to describe or even name what passed. Presumably some copy of this will get beyond our border; we should like
to keep our good name. We would much prefer to give our opinions on
Lower Cumberland Park. But another writer (page one, continued page
seven) has already rehearsed his eyewitness, first-hand account. And;
anyway; in his words, q. ••• chances are, no one lives there any mote."
Dubious to time, the arc became visible in the late afternoon of the
overcast day. In a spectrum ranging only through grey, black, and blue,
you would have to see to judge ,the elfects of those golds and bronzes,
those reds and purplish browns! Minutes later, most of us here had
gathered in the August Garden. The view was awesome. Speculation,
before awe silenced it, was rampant. When, after fifteen minutes, perhaps a fourth of the disk had emerged, we had our first case ·of hy.steria
... But rather than dwell on those understandable breakdowns, let us
commend Professor Wellrnanon his level-headedness throughout, and
Budgie Goldstein on her indomitable high spirits.
More than an hour in the rising, the monumental ... disk? sphere?
whatever? eventually cleared the visible buildings. There is some
question, even among those gathered in August, as to whether the orb
actually hovered, or whether it immediately changed direction and
began to set again, slightly (by no more than a fifth of its diameter)
to the left-this last, the estimate of Wallace Guardowsky.
The lower rim, at any rate, was above the horizon for fifteen or
Creatures of Light and Darkness 491
twenty minutes. Even at full height, it could be stared at for minutes
because of the veiling clouds. Colonel Harris advised, however, that
we curtail prolonged gazing. The setting, almost all are agreed, took
substantially less time than the rising, and has been estimated between
fIfteen minutes and a half an hour. We have heard several attempts now,
to estimate size, composition, and trajectory. We doubt recording even
the ones we could understand would be much use-the merest indulgence in cleverness before something so ... awful! Do we hear objections from you eager for meaningful cosmologie distractions? May we
Simply ask your trust: Of the explanations heard, none, frankly, was that
clever. And we do not choose to insult our readers.
We recall, with distrust and wheedling astonishment, the speed at
which the last such celestial apparition acquired, by common consent of the common, its cognomen. How heartening, then, that this
vision should prove too monstrous for facile appellation. (One has
been suggested from a number of quarters, but aU common decency
and decorum forbids us to mention it; we have defamed the young
woman, many feel, enough in these pages already.) Indeed, though a
label might cling to such when we review it with a smile, certain images lose their freedom and resonance if, when we regard them with
a straight face, we do so through the diffraction of a name.
"What do you think of that?" Faust asked, coming a little ways across
the street.
Kid laughed. "Calkins is pretty qUick to call a spade a spade. But
when it comes to naming anything else, he's still chicken-shit!"
"No, no. Not that." Faust had to toss the rolled paper three times
before getting it into the second story window. "I mean on page one."
Kid, sitting on the stoop, leaned down to scratch his foot. "What-?"
He turned back to the front of the tabloid. "Where is Cumberland Park,
anyway?"
"Lower Cumberland Park?" Faust craned his ropy neck and, beneath his corduroy jacket, scratched his undershirt. "Thars down atthe
other end of}ackson. That'S where they got some really bad niggers. It's
where the great god Harrison lives."
"Oh," Kid said. "Where I was last night. It says here something
about nobody living there any more."
Faust hefted the bundle on his hip. "Then all I know is that I leave
a God-damn lot of papers in front of a God-damn lot of doors, and they
492 Dhalgren
ain't there the next day when 1 come back. Damn, splashing around in
all that water in Ihe street yestetdaymorning!" He squinted back at the
window. "It was better this morning though. Hey, 1 see you again tomorrow. That your book the office is fuJ.\ up with?"
"I dantt know,H Kid said. "Is it?2t
Faust frowned. "You shonld come up ,to the office sometime and
take a look where they print ,the paper and things. Come up with me,
some day. I'll show it all to you. Your book went in the day before yesterday-" Faust snapped his fingers. "And I put Cartons ofit in the
bookstores last night. Soon as it ... well, you know, got dark."
Kid grunted and opened the Times again, to look at something not
Faust.
"Get your morning paper!" The old man loped down the block, hollering into the smoke: "Right here, get your morning paper!"
What he'd opened to was another quarter-page advertisement for
Brass Orchids. He left it on the stoop, and walked toward the corner,
when a sound he'd been dimly aware ·of broke oVer the sky: Roaring.
And nestled in the roar, the whine a jet makes three blocks, from the airport_ Kid looked as the sound gathered above him. Nothing was visible;
he looked down the block. Faust, a figurine off in a milky aquarium,
had stopped toO. rhe sound rolled away, lowering.
Faust moved on to disappear.
Kid turned the corner.
It's different inside the nest, he thought, trying to figure what should
be the same:
The crayoning On the dirty wallThe loose ceiling fixtureIn his hand, the knobs squared and toothy shaft rasped out another
inchA black face came from the middle room, looked back inside; shook
his head, and went down to the bathroom. Among voices, Nightmare's
laugh, and:
-Okay. 1 mean, okay." That was Dragon Uidy. "You said your thing,
nOw what you want us to do?"
While someone else in the hubbub, shouted, "Hey, hey, hey come
on now. Hey! n "r mean now ..• yeah!» Nightmares voice separated. "What do you
want?"
,
Creatures of Light and Darkness 493
Kid went to the door.
Across the room, Siam and Glass noticed him with small, different
nods. Kid leaned on the jamb. The people in the center, their backs to
him, were not scorpions.
"I mean-" Nightmare, circling, bent to hit his knees-"what do
you want?"
"Look." John turned to follow him, holding the lapels of his Peruvian vest. "Look, this is very serious!» His blue work shirt was rolled
up his forearms; the sleeves were stained, dirty, and frayed at one
elbow. His thumbnails, the only ones visible, were very clean. "1 mean
you guys have got to ... " He gestured.
Milly stepped out of the way of his arm.
"Gotta what?" Nightmare rubbed his shoulder. "Look, man 1 wasn't
there. 1 didn't know nothing about it"
"We were someplace else." Dragon Uidy turned a white cup in her
dark hands, shoulders hunched, sipping, watching. "We weren't even
anywhere around, you know?" She alone in the room' drank; and drank
loudly.
Mildred brushed away threads of red hair and looked much older
than Dragon Uidy. (He remembered once thinking when neither were
present that, for all their differences, they were about the same age.)
Dragon Uidy's lips kept changing thickness.
"This is shit!" Nightmare kneaded his arm. "I mean this is real shit,
man! Don't load this shit on me. You want to talk to somebody-" His
eyes came up beneath his brows and caught Kid-"talk to him. He was
there, 1 wasn't. It was his thing.»
Kid unfolded his arms. "What'd 1 do?"
·You-" Mildred turned-"killed somebodyl"
He fett, after moments, his forehead wrinkle. ·Oh yeah?" What
cleared inside was distresSingly close to relief. "When?" he asked with
the calm and contrapuntal thought: No. No, that's not possible, is it?
No.
"Look," John said, and looked between Nightmare and Kid. "Look,
we could .always talk to you guys, right? 1 mean you're pretty together,
you know? Nightmare, we've always done right by you, hey? And
you've done right byus. Kid, you used to eat with us all the time, right?
You were almost part of our family. We were gonna put you up the first
night you got here, weren't we? But you guys can't go around and murder people. And expect us to jllst sit around. I mean We have to do
something."
494 Dhalgren
"Who'd we kill?" he asked, realizing, they don't mean mel They
mean us. The feeling came cold and with loss.
-Wally!' Milly said from the edge of hysteria. "Wally Efrin!"
The name rang absolutely hollow in his mind. Kid searched the
company squatting in memory before the communal cinderblock Hre
over beans and vegetable hash with spam; Wally Efrin? (The short-hair
he'd once asked to help him get wood who'd said nO because he was
too frightened to leave the others? The one who had sat between him
and Lanya and talked non-stop of Hawaii? The heavy one with the
black hair long enough to sit on who kept asking people whether or
not we'd seen his girl friend? One he'd seen but never noticed? One
he'd never seen? He remembered Jommy and a half dozen others.)
"Where?' he asked, at her silence. "What'd we kill him for?"
"Oh, for Christ's sake ... !" Milly shook her head.
"Yesterday," John said. "Yesterday afternoon. When you were all at
that house, with the __ . sun. Mildred was there-'
"I didrrt know about it till after 1 got home," she said, in the voice
one used to make excuses.
"Me nei!her," Kid said. "So do you want to tell me?'
"No 1 don't want to ... " Milly exclaimed. "This is really just terri- , .
ble! This is animal. .. !'
"You were in charge ,there, Kid, weren't you?" John asked.
"So everybody tells me.'
"Well, it seems ,that-now 1 wasn't there, but this is what I've been
told .. ."
Kid nodded.
" ... It seems like some ohhe guys started a Hght. And ... what?
Wally tried to break it up?'
"He may have started the Hght,' Milly said to the floor, "with ,them."
"I guess most of the people were upstairs. This was downstairs in the
kitchen. He got beat up pretty bad, I guess. Someone hit him a couple
of times, In the head. With the bar of a police lock. Then everybody left
I guess. Apparently lots of people there didn't even know about it. It
was downstairs.' John repeated: "In the kitchen. 1 mean, Mildred didn't
know until after she got back andJommy told her." A movement of
JohnS tanned chin indicated thatJommy was the emaciated boy with a
lot of brown hair, and smaH, pale eyes. (He had rememberedJommy;
but he had not recognized him ... )
"Everybody left him, because they thought he was just knocked out
or something. Or they Were scared. Then we went back for him. He
was dead."
Creatures of Light and Darkness 495
"Who did it?" Kid shifted his bare foot, which was tingling.
Copperhead stood in the kitchen door, one fist on the jamb.
John looked atJommy who pointed immediately to the scorpion
on the couch, the unshaven, pimpley, white youngster: "Him!" who
grunted at the accusation and raised his head a little. He was also the
scorpion whom the long-haired youngsters had held, crying, on the
balcony as the great circle set.
"You kill somebody yesterday afternoon?" Kid asked.
"No!' He said it thickly and loudly and questioningly, trying the answer for effect.
Nightmare sat, now, at Dragon Lady's feet. Head against the wall, he
looked from speaker to speaker, with the smile of an enthusiast at a
tennis match.
"You beat anybody up?" Kid asked.
"Beat the fuck out of 'im!" The scorpion's futs bounced on the
couch's rim. "Yeah! With a fuckin piece of pipe. But 1 didn't know what
kind of pipe it was! , .. or if he was dead!"
"Shit, I sure did!" Glass chuckled. "I knew it when you hit the
motherCucker the first time. The second, third .•. all those other times
you were banging on him, man, that was just extra."
"You shut the fuck up!" (It was, Kid remembered, the scorpion for
whom he had rescued the bronze lion.) "I didn't kill nobody."
"But you did beat somebody over the head with a piece of pipe yes"
terday?"
"Look, I didn'l. ... He stalled on the word, and stood, fists flailing
about his shoulders to beat away the harrier to speech, then yelled, " ...
didn't kill any God-damn body with no-"
"SIT DOWN, GOD DAMN IT ... !" Kid bellowed, coming away from
the door by three steps. That, he thought in the silence, was pretty theatrical. But he was astonished by its efficacy. Twitching behind his race,
he felt an embryonic giggle. Both feet and hands were tingliog. Shall I
say the next thing, or shall I yell it? (The scorpion was leaning back on
the couch, balanced On his futs, his seat not quite on the cushion, an expression not quite on his face.) "DID YOU BEAT ON SOME KID'S
HEAD WITH A PIPE ... ?" He'd made the choice to avoid laughing.
The scorpion sank to the cushion. The expression was terror. "1
guess so?" the scorpion asked qUietly. "I don't know .. _ ?"
Kid shook both hands hard, by the hips, to return the feeling. He
heard one of the people beside him creak a floor board and catch
brealh.
"Look," he said to John. Milly, behind him, seemed more frightened
496 Dhalgren
than the scoIpion on UttleJommy had an intent expression
of cold illterest. "Why don't you people just get the fuck out of here,
all right?"
"Urn . .. " JOhll's thumbs had gone beneath the lapels with the rest
of his fingers. "You kRow we haven', had a ... trial or anything." He
glanced at the scorpion. "Mildred said maybe Wally started N, you
know-"'
"I didn't see it," M.lly reiterated. "Somebody just told-"
Kid breathed in, and was still surprised that it cut the ribbon of her
whisper like scissors. "You all get out."
"Now we're not trying to ... " John began: Milly,Jommy, and the
others had all started for the door. He let go his lapels and followed.
"What'd you do with Wally, huh?" Kid called.
"Huh?" John stopped a moment. "We just left-"
"No," Kid interrupted. "No, don't tell me about it!" He kneaded One
fistinthe other. Feeling was beginning to return. The ge5turesentJohn
pushing against the people in front of him to get out of the room, beating lleIVously against his leg.
The scorpion on the couch looked Clutching his
lamp, or on the balcony crying; Kid thought: He's looked miserable
every time I've noticed him.
"ShiU" Kidsaid. (Outside, he heard the door close behind the commune deputation.)
The scorpion bounced a little and blinked.
"Ah, shit!" Kid turned and walked out of the room.
Three steps down the hall, Kid heard a noise behind him, and
turned.
Nightmare swung around the door jamb, an incongruous grin on
his face. "Man, you're too fuckin muchl" Nightmare pranced, jingling,
in the hall, slapped the waH. "Reallyl You're too much."
Right behind him, Copperhead came out and asked, "Hey, what you
want to do with Dollar in there?" He thumbed back in the room.
So thaI'S his name, Kid thought (Dollar?), while asking, "Huh?"
"You want me to rough him up a little for you?" Copperhead asked.
"Yeah, I'D do it. I don't mind doing shit Uke that. I mean if he goes
around hitting people over the head, he's gonna get us in trouble, you
know? You want me to work him oved"
Kid made a disgusted face. "No! You don't have to do anything
like-"
"If you want me to," Copperhead announced over Nightmare's
Creatures of Light and Darkness 497
shoulder, "I'll kill the little white bastard. Or I could just work him over
to scare him, you know ... "
"No," Kid repeated. "No, 1 don't want you to do that.·
"Maybe later ... ?" Copperhead said. "When you thought about it?"
"Well, not now;" Kid said. "Just leave him alone now."
Nightmare laughed as Copperhead went back into the room. "What
were you trying to do, huh? Man, you am too much!"
"Just find out if he did it. That's all."
Nightmare held his laughter in his mouth; it bellied his cheeks till
he swallowed it. "Did you find out?"
From inside, there was a sudden crack and a cry. Voices silenced
around the sound of loud sipping:
"Now the Kid told me I'm supposed to wait till later to work you
O'l'er, cocksucker. But don't give me any shit, you hear? You go around
breaking people's heads, 1 think I'm gonna have some fun breaking
yours. Now get out of here."
"1 ... guess so," Kid said.
"I mean," Nightmare shook his open pahas in front of Kid's hips, "I
was just wondering if you fmlnd out 1 wasn't there. You was, right? So
you should know if he done it or not." He backed away, grinning.
"Hey!"
"What?"
"Come here. 1 want to talk to you."
Nightmare'S arms folded low on his stomach, then raised up his
broad chest so that the chains looped across his forearms. "Sure." He
tilted his head, warily. "What you want to talk about?"
"1 just want to know what-hey, you come on with me."
"Sure," Nightmare said; then his tongue went into the side of his
jaw, licking for something among back teeth.
They went up the hall and onto the service porch. Nightmare, arms
Sti'll folded, stood in the doorway squinting. Dulling smoke hung only
yards beyond the screening, Kid asked: "What are you trying to do, huh?"
"What do you mean?" Nightmare'S forearms slid across one another to tighten toward a knot.
"r mean you. And Dragon lady and all. How come 1 suddenly get to
be the boss about everything?"
"You do it pretty well."
"But 1 want to know why."
·WeH." Nightmare looked at Ihe floor and let himself fall against
the jamb. "It's gotta be somebody, right?" Boards around them creaked.
498 Dhalgr£ll
"But what about Y01:l?" .
"What about me?" The boards creaked again, though NIghtmare
hadn't moved. "What you want to know about me?"
"Just why. that's all. You want a new boss-why not one of the
spades, or something. I mean what's with. you?" . .
Nightmare rolled his wet, red back his mouth, and
nodded. His left eye, Kid noticed agam, had the slightest caSI.
The water puddling in the sink shook beneath the crusty faucet.
"I thought it would be sort of interesting see .wbat would
if one of you brainy. crazed types was mamng things for a while.
the brainy rtiggers in BeHona had sense enough to get We t
got too much to choose from so we might as well make It
right? 1 ain't gonna stay in this fucking fog hole the rest of my life. Its
a real gas being Nightmare, you know? But I'm get back to StLouis get me a little foreign car, do some work m the gym, and put
two three ladies back to work for me, and I'm gonna be Larry H.
Jonas all over again. And I b,ope I don't ever hear about no Nightmare
nO more. If somebody shouts it out on Sixth Street, I'm gonna walk
down Olive. I've done too many things here I'd just as soon leave here."
He stood up. "You strip off the Nightmare, and 1 got me a n:'me. I know
people. In St. Louis." His hand slid up to his shoulder, bIg fmgers working. "So I figured I'd leave you here. Besides, Denny you. That little cocksucker's got a head on his shoulders. Not like of
dumb nuts. You don't look like you mind." Among the links saggmg
on his chest, bright beads caught more light than there was to catch,
winking and dying and winking.
"Hey, that scar on your shoulder?" Kid asked. "You and Dragon bldy
getting on pretty good?" . "Uke a bitch. Sometimes." Nightmare's face tWISted a moment about
his broken tooth. "And then sometimes-" he frowned-"weH, you
knOw." After the faucet dripped three more times, he turned to
paused to look over his shoulder. "You want to talk about anything else?
"No." Kid said. "ThaIS aU."
Nightmare left. . . Across the hall was a rOom Kid had never been m. He opened the
door. .
Dollar silhouetted before the torn window shade, turned. The lion
peered b; his hip from the sill. The taste of burning at the back of Kicfs
throat flooded forward, into an amazing stench: on one of the overlapping mattresses was a charred halo around a crater tWO feet acroSS
Creatures of Light and Darhness 499
of ashes and burned cotton. Newspaper and magazine pictures had
been pasted over one wall; many had been ripped off again.
One of the three blacks sitting on the floor glanced at him. The litblond grrl shrugged her pea jacket back up her shoulders and pulled
It across her breasts.
are you ... I mean, hey, man ... ?" Dollar stepped up unKid, look, you're supposed to be an all-right guy, huh? You
don t gOtta hurt me. Please? Man, I ain't never done nothing like that
before in my life, you know? ... You want me to ... ?" He took another
... what. are you trying to do? Hull?" His hand strayed in
the chams around his neck, twisted in them.
. it is," Kid said, "it looks like I'm doing it." All the muscles
III hIS face felt tight he went back into the hall.
Noise coming from the front room. Nightmares laughter rose.
Dragon Ladys cut acrOSS it.
As if they'd suddenly heated, Kid pawed beneath the back of his 'Vest
and, from his belt, pulled loose the books. Both were creased. The face
of one was rubbed and dirty. So was the back of the other
"Hey. on, come on, sweetheart!:n Nightmare "What
you trymg to do to me, huh? What are you trying to ...• and exploded in laughter.
". "1 just asked," Dragon Lady amIounced with hysterical deliberation,
If you some more .God-damned coffee ... n The last syllable became a shriek, tumbling m counterpoint to Nightmare's laugh till both
splashed into the cistern of mirth. '
Kid took refuge in the
. Pants about his knees, he sat. A fUgitive bubble in the gut cramped
his abdomen; the cramp faded. broke wind and knew he was empty.
He turned the books over, flIpped through one, then the other. He
wanted to read one poem, at least, through. A minute later, he realized
he'd been deliberating not which poem, but in which book to
read II. Was. the. discomfort in his belly a ghost ofthegas? No.
book m either hand, he joggled them. Time had been spent
wrItmg these. The tillIe was mornings with his forehead wrinkled
and the silent beyond the blanket's edge; was
evemngs at the bar WIth candlelight scoring bottles with their dif-
,ferent contents at. heights like pistons in an engine; was a
broken curb on eIther SIde while he sat with the ballpoint burrtin
his middle finger. Writing, he had not thought to retrieve any of i;
But the prospect of publication had somehow convinced him magic
500 Dhalgrm
was in process ,that would relurn W him, in tacta (Bot memoriam), some
of what the city had squandered. The conviction was now identified oy
its fraudulence, before the inadequate objects. But as it died, kicking in
his gul, spastic and sluttering, he knew it had been as real and unques.-
tioned as any surround: air to a bird, water to a ftsh, earth to a worm.
He was exhausted, with an exhaustion that annihilated waBt. ABd
all he could conceive of wanting was to try again; to make more poems,
to put them in a book, to have Ihat book made real by reproduction,
and give that hallucination another chaBce!
He had nothiBg to write. He could not imagine what another poem
of his would be, how it might lilt, or even look. Is that, he
why they call it "crealion"? The texture on the eye, the corrugation on
the air around him had absorbed dl. There was nothing left ( ... about
what you see about you, what's happerting tG you, what you feel. No).
No. Something had to be ... created. As these had been.
A muscle in his. shoulder tensed.
He'd Once been scared of things like that: ... a blood.clot breaking
loose from the vein wall to race toward the heart, jamming a valve!
Habit commenced a shiver.
He caught up his oreath, and his pants, and the books from where
he'd dropped them. The leering mannequin, chained and bloody,
leaned against the tank and smiled benignly up at Kid's left nipple. Kid
scratched it, put the books back under his belt, and went out.
In Dennis room he took two rungs of the ladder at OBCe. His chin
gained the loft. "Hey, wake up!» Denny didnit, so he climbed up the rest
of the way, kneeled astraddle, and took hold of the boy's head. "Hey!"
"God damn--'!' Denny tried to roll to his back. One arm shot out
and waved. "What the fuck are you ..• "
"Come on, get up!" KidS hands clamped, and Denny's came back to
grasp his wrist. . . .
"Ohay!" Denny said, his cheeks pushed together, dIStorting his
voice. ·Shit, man. I'm getting up, all right ... ?"
"You got to take me to Lauya's place.' Kid raised his leg and sat back.
"You know where it is, huh? You took her there. You know!"
Denny grunted and pushed himself up on his elbows. Boots and
chains by his head lay on a crumple of green. His vest's leather edge
back from a pinkened line across one waxy pectoral. "Yeah, I guess so.
"Get the Cuck up, cocksucker." Kid gestured. "r want to go see her."
'Okay, okay." Denny reached back for his boots and started to put
,them on. Once he glanced up and said, "Shitl"
Creatures of Light and Darkness 501
Kid grinned at him. "Move your ass."
. "F"..ck you," D;nny said and ducked his head through rattling
Come on. He swung hIS feet over the edge and jumped.
KId swung over the ladder while Denny bobbed erect in the door.
way.
"What's all the rush for?" Dennyasked. "Hey, stop pushing me, will
you?" as Kid shoved him into the hall.
"I'm not hurting you," Kid said. "Did you know Dollar beat some
kid to death with a pipe?" .
"Huh? When?n
I.IYesterday. n
. Denny tried to whistle. It squeaked at the beginning and was all air.
"DolIar's a crazy motherfucker, you know that? I mean he always was
crazy. Hell, all the white guys in the nest are nuts .•
"Sure.' Kid herded Denny toward the hall door.
"Why'd he do it?"
Kid shrugged. "1 dunno."
hall door opened. Thirteen (Smokey behind) stepped inside,
looking around as though he expected something ... dilIerent. "Hey,
Kid! Oh, heyman, I got to talk to you! You know DoIlar? Well, Wejus;
got here, but ... somebody told me yesterday he got a bar, from a po.
lice lock, and beat some kid to-"
"GET OFF MY ASS!" Kid said very loudly in Thirteen's face heft.
ing his fist. If I keep this up, he thought, I'm going to hit
"Now just get 01I my ass, will you?"
Thirteen, one hand against his green tank top (the "13" tattoo
wide), had backed against one wall, and Smokey, wide.eyed,
agaInst the other.
Kid put his hand on Denny's shoulder. "Come on. Let's go!"
They stalked between them and out the door; it swung to behind.
Palimpsest
" ... just watch out. Oh, yeah, you just better watch out. I know. I
knOw." He wagged his finger, backed away; talked Spanish. Then:
"They gonna get you-"
"Look, man," Kid said. "Will you-"
"It's all right. It's all right. You just watch out, noW. Please? I'm
sorry. I'm sorry." His thick neck sweated. He tugged at the wool. "I'm
sorry. You just lemme 'lone, huh? They gonna ... " Suddenly he
looked around, turned, and lumbered into the alley.
"Jesus Christ." A smile hovered about Dennys face. "What ... was
that about?"
"1 don't knOw." One book had fallen on the sidewalk. The other
leaned against the curb.
"1 mean this guy just comes up and starts to push you like that. I
thought you were gonna hit him." Denny nodded heavily. "You
should've hit him. Why'd he just want to come up and start messing
On us like that?"
"He didn't mess on you any." Kid picked up the books and put
them back under his belt.
"He's just crazy or something, huh?"
"Come on,l1 Kid said. "Yeah, he's . . . Crazy:R
504 Dhalgren
"Jesus Christ. That's really funny. You ever see him before?"
"Yeah."
They walked.
"What was he doing then?"
"Just about the same thing ... one time. The others? He was pretty
normal."
"A nut," Denny pronounced and scratched his groin inside both
pants pockets. "She lives over there. I thought you knew already. She
didn't tell you?"
"No."
Denny wrinkled his nose. "All this shit in the air. I don't think its
very healthy, you know? What's the matter?"
Kid had stopped, to hook up a section of the chain across his
stomach. A glass circle distorted the pad of his thumb into a zebra's
flank: dirty troughs whorled the flesh.
"She lives right over there," Denny reiterated, warily.
"All right."
In step, they angled into the street.
"She got a nice place."
A tension held, suspended: Kid wished he could examine it more
closely: diffract, reflect, magnify ...
They turned the corner and went down the ,empty street. "Looks
like raint doesn't it?" Denny said.
"It always looks like rain."
"It doesn't feel like rain."
"It never feels like rain."
"Yeah, you know; that's right?" Denny hopped up the concrete
steps, holding the aluminum rail. "It never does!"
Kid followed, surveying the three-story facade. Denny thumbed
the bell.
"They live on the top floor. The first two floors are empty so people
won't think anyone's in the building."
"It's a good idea not to attract attention, Igness." Kid contemplated asking who was the rest of "they" when footsteps clacked on
a stairway.
"Who is it?" asked a woman. Voice familiar? He wondered from
where.
"I'm a friend of Lanya's. I'd like to see her."
The peephole darkened. "Just a second."
The door opened. "You know, I didn't recognize your voice at first,"
Palimpsest 505
Madame Brown said. "How have you been, Kid?" She took in Denny:
"Hello. It's nice to see you again ... Denny, isn't it?" Her neck glittered.
"Lanya's living with you?" Kid, shocked, was unsure why.
"Um-hm. Why don't you come inside?"
Somewhere above the first landing, Muriel barked.
"Hush!" Madame Brown commanded the air. "Hush, I say!"
The dog barked three times more.
·Come in, come in. Pull the door behind you. It locks itself."
They followed her up the steps.
"I think," she let fall behind, "Lanya's asleep. Even with her school
we've both been having an incredible time keeping to any sort of
schedule. I don't know when she went to bed. I suspect it was rather
late.:n
·She'll want to see me," Kid said. He frowned at the back of
Madame Brown's red rough hair.
·Oh, I'm sure she will."
They rounded the first landing.
MUriel, visible now; barked again.
"Hush! Now hush up! These are people you know, dear. It's Kid.
And Denny. You played with Denny for hours the last time he was
here. Don't carryon like that." She reached for the dog's muzzle;
Muriel qUieted. "Did I say Lanya was asleep? I doubt it after all that.
Naughty! Naughty!"
Denny was looking up and down and Sideways-not like somebody who'd played there for hours. Candlesticks were everywhere:
three on a sm"ll table beneath a framed portrait, an iron brace full in
the corner, two more on the windowsill between white curtains
dulled by the sky behind.
"You got electricity here?" Kid asked.
"rn two rooms," Madame Brown explained. "Oh, the candles?
Well, we're so near Jackson, we thought we better have them around,
in case. D
Two rooms away, unlit: a wall of books, a desk, an easy chair.
"That's my office in there,D Madame Brown commented on Kid's
stare.
Which brought his eyes to more candleholders in the next room.
"Um ... this is really a nice place."
"There're some marvelous houses all through this area, if you just
look. They're not hard to find at all. Though I suppose we were lucky
with this one. Most of the furniture was already here.'
506 Dhalgren
"The rent must be a steal," Kid said, "if you don't mind the neighborhood."
"Oh, we don't pay any-" After an emotionless moment (Kid
stopped and Denny bumped into him) she laughed, loudly, shrilly.
"By the way, congratulations on your book! Mary Richards showed
me a copy the other day. She just tells everybody about how she
knows you now.D
·Yeah?" He'd intended the smile to be cynical; but pleasure
pushed him into joyous, goofy sincerity. "She does?"
"She reads people passages out loud after dinner. I'm sure if you
came by, you'd get a positively ebullient welcome." She raised an eyebrow: ·You really would."
"Maybe from her," Kid said. "Not from him. Don't you think those
people ... ?" and, watching her, decided to let it drop.
But she took it on:
"What is it that writer all you youngsters were reading here a few
years ago was saying: 'The problem isn't to learn to love humanity,
but to learn to love those members of it who happen to be at hand.'"
Collected Poems 1930-1950, Stones, Pilgrimage, Rictus, The Dynamic
Moment, A Sense of Commencement and The Chartemouse of Ballarat,
all by Ernest Newboy, were book-ended at the back of the desk with
two African statue!tes. The last three volumes together were twice as
thick as the first four.
'Well, they're not at my hand. I me .... , I don't hold your friends
against you. 1 got some pretty strange ones myself."
"I didn't think you did, which is one of the reasons 1 like you. And
they haven't done anything to me ... yet."
The "yet" challenged him to possibilities. It also tested his reticence. So he asked, "How'd you and Lanya get ... together here?"
"Oh, she's a fine roommate! Energetic, lively ... It's nice to have
someone so sharp around. When I had to leave my other place-but
you weren't here for that. You could have helped us move. I was
being terrorized to death. had happened, definitively, but I
had to move. Lanya helped me find this place. I've always liked her
and ... we1l, I suggested that we share. It's worked out very nicely, I
think. The school is only a couple of blocks from here. The few patieRts I've taken on-n
ThebeHmng.
.One now: You know-" as she moved around them toward the
ha1l-"I really .hot>ght ·that's what you were. When I came down to
let you in." She waved toward another hallway. "Lanya's room is
Palimpsest 507
down there. Go in and wake her up. I know she wants to see you."
They heard her galt go from the hallways measured rush to the stairwell's hurried canter.
Denny said, "Nice, huh?" softly, then sucked at his upper lip
where pale hairs stabbed about in reddened flesh. 'Yot> want to ... go
to her room?!!
"Yeah.'"
"Okay." Denny went into the corridor.
There were no bulbs in the elaborate ceiling fixture. An immense
painting (Denny-tall by Kid-long), bordered in gilt, looked, as they
passed in shadow, completely black.
"That door," Denny said.
It was ajar.
"Go in, go on in," Kid said. Denny didn't; so Kid did.
. Warm air P?ife? at his face. The burning here had a hint of gasIn front of a Ille fireplace a heater flickered and hissed through its
lower grille.
. She. slept on a daybed, under a pink blanket. Before a huge canvas
With VIolent colors and no frame, arms of vegemtion, white and purple,
bent over her from a dozen pots, spidered in the bay window, or hung
from the manrle.
"Christ, it's hotl", Denny said, "How she sleep in here?"
"Go on," Kid said. 'Wake her up.·
Denny frowned at him.
"I want to watch,' Kid said.
Denny's tongue pushed out his lower lip a moment. He stepped
forwardHer cheek was flat on the pillow, and both bare shoulders touched
the sheet. Her hand near her face bent sharply at the wrist. One heel,
greyed at the rim, stuck out, toes turned in.
-put one knee on the mattress (she went Uhhhh. turned her face
down, and her heel pulled under the cover), swung the other over to
straddle her and grabbed her head.
"Hey .. ." One arm shot out and waved. "God damn, let go of
my ... " She got over On her back. "What are you dOing, huh ... Oh,
hey . , ." The arm came back and locked arot>nd Denny's thigh.
"Look, babes, I'm sound asleep, huh? .. ."
Denny shook her head againuOh, come on . . n
-and laughed. "Kid said I shot>ld wake you up.'
"Huh?"
508 Dhalgren
liRe wanted to watch. n
"Wilh binoculars from the roof across the street?"
"He's right here."
"Where?" She pushed herself up and looked around Denny's leg.
"Hey!" Then a smile poured into her face, mixing with the sleep like
milk poured into water, while her eyes cleared like jade.
"I brought you something," Kid said.
"Him?" She laid her head on Denny's hip. "I like him. He's great
and it's very sweet of you. But I'm awfully sleepy."
"Not that. " Kid pulled out the books. "These." He sat down on the
bed.
Her T-shirt was torn at the side and he could see the place. her
breast started,. and then the nipple under cloth. (He contemplated the
difference in the tWo colors for which even he could only think of the
word white.)
"What are-?" 1;hon she let go of Denny who sat down, shaking
the bed. "Oh!" She took them from him, grinning.
"What are those, anyway?" Denny asked.
"Kid's poems!" Lmya said.
"I guess one of those can be for you."
"Yeah?" Denny asked. "Why didn't you give it to me before,
then?"
Lanya gave Denny his book and opened hers. "It really looks nice
... I think you sat on this one a while, though."
IlYou're not mad at me now?" Kid asked.
"Was 1 everr"
"Sometimes I think you're stranger than' am."
"Women's Liberation has really lost us the prerogative of cltanging our minds, hum?" She sighed. "Enough people will be glad to
see it go.n
"Hey,' Kid asked, "are you balling Madame Brown?"
"No!" Lanya looked up from the book, surprised. "What gave you
that idea?"
"I don't know." Kid shrugged. "She likes chicks, and, well, you're
here-"
Lanya frowned. The book slapped the blanket. "Can't two people
just be friends in this city?"
"You should be balling her." Denny didn't look up from his.
"Why?" LIllya demanded.
"Cause she's your friend," Denny said.
Palimpsest 509
Lanya's frown lingered a moment. Then she laughed. "What are
you, the Counter-Culture Dale Carnegie? Hey, move off my foot,
huh?"
Denny moved. "You write all this stum" He turned another page,
turned back to the cover, opened it again. H. turned another page,
closed it, opened it. "Hey, this is the thing they keep on advertising in
the God-damn newspaper, huh?"
"Sure is." Lanya turnedanolher page too. "Oh, you're a doll to
bring me this." She glanced at him, looked back. "' . . . I'm afraid I
have a confession, though.'
"What . . . ?"
"I've already given away about twelve copies each to practically
everybody 1 knOw. And I think I have about half the poems down by
heart-' knew them before they were published, really."
"Thats all right." Kid tried to discover whether that made him feel
bad or good.
"' was going to ask you to write something in the copy I've been
holding onto for myself. But this one's mine now." She held it up to
her nose. "It smells like you. That's much better than an autograph, 1
think."
Denny closed his book for the sixth time and sniffed it. 'You like
,the way Kid smells?"
"Mmmmmm." Lanya put her arm around Kid's chest and tugged
him backward. "Don't you?"
"It gives me a hard-on," Denny said, "sometimes. But I don't know
whether I like it."
Kid lay back. "I guess that's nice you've been giving them out. I
d·idn't know you could get hold of it that long. No, you're going to
tell me about some more days, missed. How do you get this jungle to
grow in here?"
"It's all coleus," she said. "They'll grow any place."
"Creepy," Kid said. "You've got it like a fucking jungle."
"Plants are relaxing."
"Lmg as they don't take a bite out of your hand when you're try_
ing to water them." Throughout the variegated purple, he focused on
the plaster ceiling (another white than either cloth or flesh). "Do'
know Wally Efrin?"
"Wally? Of course you do. He was in the park commune. Why?"
"We murdered him yesterday."
He thought she might move suddenly; she didn't. "What?"
510 DhalgTen
"Yesterday, one of our mOre retarded honkeys beat in his head
with a pipe: to death. You were there. It was happening downstairs in
the kitchen while we were out on the balcony."
"It was Dollar: Denny said
"Lord ... " she whispered, grave with shock
"Dollar was the one you were talking to who was so-" Denny
went On.
Till she interrupted: "-I remember Dollar. Wally?"
"Which one was Wally?" Kid: closed his eyes.
"He was the boy who was always talking about Hawaii."
"Oh." Kid opened his eyes again. "Yeah. I remember."
"He's ... dead?"
·Some stupid fight. I don't know what happened. We wete all
there, and nobody-"
"1 know what happened," Denny said. "Dollar's a fuckin' nut!
Somebody probably said something he shouldn't've and Dollar didn't
know when to stop."
Lanya sucked her teeth. "That'S Wally. Kid, that's terrible! What's
going to happen?"
He shrugged. "Uke what?"
At which point Denny drew in his breath and said, ·Shit, man!
You write some God-damn bloodthirsty poems. This one about the
kid who fell down the elevator. Wow .. _"
Kid looked up at Denny.
" ..• 'Both legs .•• broken,'" Denny puzzled out, "'pulp-skulled,
jelly-hipped-'"
Kid suddenly tolled over, grabbed the book edge, and pulled it
down (" ... Hey, what the ... !" Denny said). craning over Lanya's lap
to see the print.
But Denny had misread the line. Wildly.
Kid lay his cheek on lanya's and Denny's legs.
"You all right?" Lanya asked, and Denny touched his face.
"Yeah," Kid said. "Sure, I'm fine." He raised his head again.
"How'd you know what it was about? It doesn't say anything about
an elevator shaffinthe poem."
"1 ... well, 1 figured thatl; what it ... ?" Denny looked surprised.
u • •• had to be about. I mean I was there, remember?"
"Oh." Kid put his cheek down. "Yeah."
"Is Dollar still over with the scorpions?"
"Yeah."
Palimpsest 511
"Is he all right?"
"If Copperhead doesn't decide to kill him. John and Milly came
over with a delegation this morning. To protest. I started to yell at
Dollar. Just yell, that's aiL Just to find out what had happened. He\;
not really all there, and you have to talk loud to get through, you
know? And they started to get squeamish."
Lanya said: "I've never believed in capital punishment either. And
Wally wasn't the most popular person around. Rap, rap-rap-rap-rap:
He could be annoying-"
"That's not the point ......... n
"I know 1 I knoW; believe me. I know." She rocked him, bending
above. "I mean I just ... "
"You don't believe in capital punishment as long as there're mental
hospitals, right? With violent wards. Well, we don't have any violent
wards. We don't have any jails either."
"But you have to-"
"Look" Kid pushed himself up and twisted around "I don't believe
in capital punishment period! I think if One person kills somebody
else because he gets his rocks ofT, or he just wants to, that's ... well,
maybe not right. But a bunch of people getting together and deciding
to kill somebody else because it's anything from right to expedient, is
wrong!"
"Lord," Lanya said again. "Donatien Alphonse Francois de-"
"What?" Denny said.
"Never mind." She pushed the covers down. "Lers go for a walk or
something. I'm not sleepy any more."
Kid suddenly reached across to yank Denny's hair.
"Hey--!"
Kid pulled the boy down. Denny dropped the book and grabbed at
lanya's arm. "What the fuck-"
"You like my smell?"
Lanya said, "Hey, what are you-" and backed away, frowning.
Denny's arm flapped. Kid caught it with his other hand and forced
the head into his lap. "Come on, you like it?"
"Shit!" Lanya tugged Kid's wrist. "Let go of him!"
"Hey ... !n Denny laughed loudly, nervously, and pulled; couldn',[
get loose, and yelled a little. "Come on, lemme-"
"You like it, you little bastard!"
Denny held onto Kid's hip and twisted his face.
"Yeah ... I"
512 Dhatgren
"Kid, will you stop that, for God's-"
Kid suddenly let go, held both his hands in the air. "See?"
Denny put his other arm around Kid's other hip. His face against
Kid's jeans, he tooka breath.
"It's okay when I do him like that, » Kid said to umya. "He likes it.
You like it, don't you? n
"Fuck you," Denny said. "Yeah, I like it."
·You like my smell?' umya suddenly swung up on her knees. One
knee went above Kid. She grabbed him by the ears. He started to say,
"Hey ... " but let it turn into a roar, and raised his head to mume it
between her legs. She bent and locked her arms behind his head.
"You like my fucking smell? Yeah, you like it . . ." and then she
laughed and fell over On her side. The bed's feet bounced.
Hesaid, "Yum yumyumyumyum," as fast as he could. Her legs were
warm and blocked his ears. A ligament defined itself across his jaw.
StUllaughing, she said, "1 don't think I can keep the rough act up
as long as you can, though.»
He got his mouth free. "I like it anyway. For breakfast, for lunch,
for dinner . .. n
UHey." Denny's face appeared above Lanya's thigh. "Ain't we
making a lot of fucking noise? What sort of patient she got in there
anyway?"
"Jesus •.. » Lanya laughed.
"She's a shrink,» Kid said. "She's a God-damn fucking headshrinker. She takes crazy people like Us and makes us all better. "
"I want to go for a walk," Lanya said. "Will you two please get up
and let me put my pants on?"
"She's really a head-shrinker?" Denny asked. "She got Some crazy
man in. there.?'1
"Yes," Lanya said. "Now will you please move your ass off my
foot?"
"You just don't want to ball,» Kid said.
"Not true. 1 just do want to get some air."
Kid rocked up, stood. "Okay. Fine. Who can ball with all these
Venus fly traps leering at you anyway?" And realized they made him
feel far more uncomfortable than he could, comfortably. admit. On
the desk in the bay window lay his notebook.
"Fine reason to get out of here,» Lanya said.
"I dropped my book behind the bed," Denny said. "Just a .•. eh ...
there, I gOt it.'
Palimpsest 513
Kid went to the desk and opened the grimy cover. Folded inside
was the sheet from the telephone pad. grilled with his handwriting.
"And the galleys with your corrections are in the top drawer on
the right." The last of her sentence was muffed by the T-shirt coming
off. "Mr Newboy gave me everything just before he left, when we
didn't know where you were.'
Kid sat down on the chair's torn caning.
Quickly he flipped through till he found a three-quarter-blank
page. He pulled loose his pen. The raddled pages chattered at the
pressure of his ball-point. He wrote very quickly. with his face
screwed; his lips parted across his teeth, then pressed together again.
Where his spine settled in the sacrum's socket, a suspended tension
began to release. Neither he nor it had finished when Denny. behind
him, said: 'IKid?"
But he closed the notebook cover over the page. Then he turned
around. Lanya, sitting on the bed in her jeans and sneakers, but no
shirt, looked up from the book of poems.
Denny stood in the middle of the room, one hand flat on his
thigh. "1 ... mmm ... you said ... 1 wanted to tell you, Kid, that,
well, when you go on like that with me and call me names and stuff
and push me around, I guess I don't mind it.. He looked down and
swallowed. "But I don't like it that much." The inflection of the sentence didn't resolve, so he added, " ... you know?"
Kid nodded. "Okay." .
Denny swayed a little, uncomfortably. Suddenly Lanya put the
book On the floor, and walked up behind him. She put her chin on
his shoulder, her arms around his stomach. Denny put his forearm
.long hers, rubbed the back of her wrist, and waited.
Kid went and put his arms around both of them; Lanya's bare back
under his hands was very warm. One of them held on to his waist.
After a moment Denny said: "You're both in the wrong pOSition. Him
in front and you on my ass, 1 don't get a chance at nothingHey ... " And pulled Kid close again when he started to back off.
Lanra, head bent, hair brushing Kid's nose over Denny's shoulder,
looked up with wide, wide eyes-brighter than any leaf about them.
Kid blew at her nose. Denny wriggled. "I don't think three people
Can kiss each other at the same time ... " he said.
"Yes we can," tanya said. "Heret see ... III
A minute later, heads together, arms locked around one another's
backs, Kid said, "This is comfortable."
514 Dhalgren
"I think," Denny said, moving his head down between their chins,
"I smell more than either of you."
"Mmm •.. " Lanya nodded.
"Didn't you say something about wanting to go out?" Kid asked.
She nodded again. "Mmmm? Lets go."
First cold air under his left arm, then his right. Her fingers on his
chest were the last to leave him.
He looked at the desk and wondered whether he should take the
notebook.
"You sure keep it hot in here," Denny said.
"Oh, would you turn that offIor me?"
"How?l1
mind. I'll do it."
Kid looked up: Lanya squatted before the heater, grunting and
twisting at something inside.
"There." She stoQd. "Le(s go."
"You ain't gonua put no shirt on or nothing?" Dennyasked.
The sides of the heater, cooling, clanged.
"Be a doll and let me wear your vest?"
'Sure," Denny sbrnggedout of his. "But it won't cover your tits."
"If I wanted them covered. I'd put on a shirt." She took the vest
from him. "Theres some advantages to living in this city."
"You're a funny lady."
"You're a funny boy."
DeBny bit on his lip a moment, then nodded deeply. "I guess 1 sure
as fuck am."
"What are you grinning about?" Lanya asked Kid.
"Nothing," and eaded up grinning harder. 'You gonna take up
chains too and be a member ... "
She considered a momen!, sucking her underlip. "Nope." One
nipple was i'uS( visible inside the leather lapel. The other was covered. "Just curious." And picked up her harmonica from the floor by
the bed.
They play me into violent postures. Adrift in the violent city, 1 do
nat know what stickum tacks words and tongue. Hold them there,
cradled an the muscular floor. Nothing will happen. What is the simplest way to say to someone like Kamp or Denny or Lanya that all
their days have rendered ludicrous their judgments on the night? I
can write at it. Why loose it on the half-day? Holding it in the mouth
distills an anger dribbling bitler back of the throat, a substance for
Palimpsest 515
the hand. This is not what 1 am thinking. This is merely (he thought)
what thinking feels like.
They were quiet through the living room. At the head of the steps
Denny began giggling. Lanya hurried them down. They reached the
porch, hysterical.
"What's so funny?" she asked three times; three times her face recovered from the contortions of mirth.
Kid thought: There's a momen! in her laughter when she's very
ugly. He watched for it, saw it pass again, and found himself laughing
the harder. She took his hand. and he was very glad she did. The stridence smoothed in his own voice.
Denny:S leveled, too, from some re1iefKid did not understand.
"Where's your schoo!?" Kid asked.
"Denny told me you were teaching in a school. And Madame
Brown said something about classes."
"You told me about the school," Denny said.
"It's right down there. That's where we're going now."
IIFine.JI.
She bit both lips and nodded; then slid her arm up to link Kid's
elboW; held out her other hand to Denny ... who pretended not to
see and tight-roped along the curb. So she dropped Kid's hand too.
The greea jacket was new. The shirt between the brass zippers
looked old. He came from the corner, unsteadily; head slightly down.
His varying steps took him indiscriminately left or right. Twenty-five?
Thirty? His black hair was almost shoulder length. In the bony face
there was nothing like eyes. He ... staggered closer. Tiny lids were
pursed at the back of fleshed-over sockets otherwise smooth as the
insides of teacups. One leaked a thread of mucus doWB his nose. He
came on, missiag the lamppost by a lucky detour. On twine around
his neck hung a cardboard sign, lettered in ballpoiat
"Please help mt. I,am deaf and dumb."
Denny stepped closer ,(0 Lmya and took her arm. The bliad-mute
passed. UWow-" Denny started, softly. Then breath stopped.
The heavy blond MeXican in the collarless blanket-shirt hurried
from a doorway. The irregular tap of ,the bliad-mute's cowboy boots
stopped when the Mexican seized his shoulder; his head came way
up and swung in the air like sniHiag as the Mexican took ,the bliodmute's hand. He pressed in his fist against the mute's palm, and
pressed again, and pressed again, making different shapes. The blind-
516 Dhalgren
mute nodded. Then they hurried to the corner, holding one another's
arm.
"Shit •.. ' Denny said, wonderingly and lingeringly. He looked at
Lanya. "We seen him before, you know? The big spic. He pushed
Kid, you know? Just came to him in the street and pushed him."
"Why?" Lanya asked. She reached across to hold the right lapel of
Denny's vest with her left hand.
"Don't tell me everything in this fucking city happens for a reason," Kid said. "Idon'tknow.n
"Well," Lanya said, "usually, in Bellona, everything happens
for ... " Then she sucked her teeth. "Deaf and blind? That's heavy. 1
was in San Francisco onCe. You know the welfare office on Mission
Street?"
"Yeah," Kid said, "I tried to get on welfare out there, but they
wouldn't let me."
She raised an eyebrow. "I was walking by it Qnce ... reading the
,signs on the Page Glass Company? When 1 looked down, 1 saw a
dumpy woman in a flowered house dress leading this old man who
was tapping a cane. But when she got to the steps, she stooped down
to feel around. And she was saying, 'Now 1 know ... I know where it
is.' Three more steps, and I realized she was blind, too. I watched
them till she finally got them through the door. It was fascinating,
and a little horrifying. But when 1 went on, 1 began to think: What a
marvelous image for most of human history, not to mention current
politics. Practically every relationship I know has something in it
of -and then of course it struck me, and I began to laugh right there
on the street. But the point is, it really hadn't occurred to me all the
time I'd watched them. And all I could do was think how lucky I was
that I had decided not to be an artist, or a writer or a poet. Because
how could you use a pedectly real experience like that in a work of
art today, you know?"
"I don't get it," Denny said. "What do you mean?" (Without
Denny's vest, Kid noticed one of ,the five chains Denny wore was cop- ,
per. His back and shoulders, here and there pricked with pink,
looked white as stone.)
"It's j!ist that ... " Lanya frowned. "Well, look, Denny-you've
heard the expression ... "
He hadn't.
When they'd tried to explain for a block and a half, Kid realized
that Denny was now between them once more ("But why can't you
Palimpsest 517
use something anyway that somebody already said?" Denny demanded once more. "I mean if you say where you got it from, maybe ... "),
but Kid could not remember Switching positions: gruffiy he switched
back.
"That's the school." Lanya squeezed Kid's arm. "It doesn't look like
one, 1 know. But I guess that's the point."
"It looks like a drug store: Denny said. "I wouldn't want to put a
school in no place that looked like a drug store. I mean not around
here."
"It was a clothing store,' Lanya said.
"Oh." Denny's tongue made a hillock on his cheek. "It sure looks
like a drug store."
"I hope not.' umya actually sounded worried.
"I don't think it should look like any sort of store at all,' Kid said.
"I mean if you don't want people busting in."
"That was the idea: Lanya said. "I didn't think it looked like a
store at all. At least since we took the sign off. Just a house with a
latge front window. There isn't any WritiBg on it." .
"I seen drug stores like that." Denny nodded in self-corroboration.
"People around here are always busting into drug stores and doctors'
offices 'cause they think they can fhld shit. And they find some, too."
Lanya jiggled the handle. "I thought it looked like a coffee shop."
The door swung in.
Turning inside, Kid saw curtains in front of the window. Light
prickled the weave. "I didn't notice those from the outside."
"That's because the window's so dirty it really doesn't matter.'
"It sure is dark,' Denny muttered. 'You got electricity here, dOn't
you?"
"There're lanterns," Lanya said. "But I don' t think we'd better use
them now."
"Put your lights on," Kid told Denny. Denny's hand rattled in
chains.
Lanya's hand leapt to shadow her face. ''' ... that surprised me!'
She laughed.
Shadows from the chairs swung OB the liBoleum as what had been
Denny moved toward a blackboard stand. "It sure looks like a school
inside.1l
"Actually srarted out just as a day-care center. You have no idea
how many children there are in Bellona! We don't either. They don't
all come here."
518 Dhalgren
"You take care of them while their parents go to work?" Kid
asked.
"I really don't know what their-D. she glanced at him, closed
her lips, moved them across her teeth- "what their parents do. But
the kids are better having each other to play with some place where
it's safe. And we can teach things here. Things like reading; and
arithmetic. Paul Fenster got the thing started. Most of the kids in
my section, in all the sections really, are black. But we've go t tmee
white children who're holed up with their parents over in the Em.
boriky department store."
"Shit," Denny said. "You take those bastards?"
"Somebody has to."
"I don't think I'd fall in love with any of them."
"Yes, you would. They're all cule as the devil." She picked up a
lantern that had dropped from its nail and hung it back. "When Paul
suggested that I take. over a section, at first I really wondered. I'm
not a socia,j crusader. But you wouldn't believe how good these kids
are. And quiet? With a bunch of seven, eight, and nine year aids, it's
a little unnerving Just how quiet they can be. They do practically
anything I say."
"They're all probably scared to death."
lanya made a face. "I'm afraid, really, that's what it is.»
"Of you?" Denny's great light bobbed.
"No." I..anya frowned. "Just scared. It was my idea to try actually
teaching something ... just to pass the time. It works out a lot better
than letting them run loose-mainly because they don't run." She
blinked. "They just sat around and fidgeted and looked unhappy."
She turned to the table. "Well, anyway, here-"
The aluminum face of a four·spool tape recorder, interrupted with
a quorum of dials, twin rows of knobs, tabs, and multiple ranks of
jack·sockets, gleamed above coiled wire, on which lay three stand·
mikes and several earphones.
" ..• since you're here-" I..anya sat one rod·mike upright-"you
might as well help. I WaS going to try something out that I've been
working on-Denny, if yOU'Ie going to keep that thing on, please be
still! It's distracting!"
"Okay." A chair rasped back. Denny's light, quivering, lowered
about it; and consumed it. "Okay. What do we do?"
"You can start off by keeping quiet." She pressed a switch; two
spools spun. "Then it gets more complicated. This is a great machine.
Palimpsest 519
Its two free and reversible four·track recorders on one chassis, with
built in cell·sink.· She pressed another tab; the spools slowed. She
blew a run all the harmonica toward the mike, pressed the olfbutton.
Another finger went dowu on a black tab. The spools halted, re·
versed; another finger went down.
The spools slowed, stopped.
Another finger.
They reversed.
From under the table-Kids eyes jerked down to the metallic·shot
speaker cloth-the harmonica, twice as loud and with echo, rang like
a mellophone.
I..anya wrned a knob. "Level's a little high. But that's the effect I
want for the third track.»
The tape ran back (more tabs: chud-chuh), reversed. I..anya blew
another run, and replayed it.
"Gee," Denny said. 'On the tape, it sounds just like you playing."
No, Kid thought. It sounds entirely different. He said: "It sounds
pretty good." But different.
I..anya said: "It's about okay." She turned one knob a lot, and an·
other only a little. "That should do it." She pressed another tab.
"Here goes nothing. Be quiet now.: I'm recording. n
Denny's chair leg squeaked on the floor.
I..anya scowled back over her shoulder and positioned herself at
the mike. Without lifting her sneaker heel, she began swinging her
knee to keep time. Her shoulders rounded from the armholes of
Dennys vest. She blew a long, bending note. And another. A third
seemed to slide from between them, bent back, hung in the half·dark
room-light glowed in three of the dials; red hairlines shook-and
turned over, became another note, did something to Kid's eyebrows
so they wrinkled. And Denny had turned off his shield.
She played.
Kid listened, and remembered crouching in dim leaves, leaves
tickling his jaw, while she walked beyond him, making bright music.
Then something in the playing brought him to the here and now of
the room, the plastic reels winding, the tension·arm bounCing inside
its tape loop, the needles swinging, three (of the four) signal lights
glowing like cigarettes. The music was more intense than memory;
emotional fragments, without referent scenes, resolved through the
brittle, slow notes. She moved her mouth and her forehead; her two
forefingers rose vertical over the silver (her nails were slighliy dirty;
520 Dhalgren
the music was wholly beautiful), then clamped. Silver slid between
her lips. She played, played more, played some phrase she'd played
before, then turned the tune to its final cadences, taking it to some
unexpected key. and held and harped on the resolving chord sequence;
a little trill of notes kept falling into it, every two beats; and falling;
and falling.
She dropped the harp, clutching it in both hands, against her bare
breasts, and grinned.
After maybe ten seconds. Denny applauded. He sluck out his legs
from the chair, bounced his heels, and laughed. "That's pretty good!
Wow! That's preltynice!"
Kid smiled, pulled his bare toes back on top of Ms boot, pushed
his shoulders forward; in his lap his hands knotted. "Yeah ... "
Lanya grinned at them both, stopped the tapes. "I'm not finished
yet. You guys have to help on the next part. D She plugged in one earphone set, tossed it to Denny: "Don't drop-'
He almost did.
She started to toss another sel to Kid; but he got up and ,took it.
Tangled cords swung to the floor. "I'm going to lay in another track
on top of it. Remember that little part just before the end? Well, this
time you have to clap there, five times. each time a little louder. And
sort of shout or hool or something on the last clap." She played the
section over.
Denny started to beat his hands together.
"Just five times," she said. "Then shout. I'll bring you in. Let's try
it." They did. Denny hooted like a choo-choo train, which broke Kid
up laughing.
"Come on," Lanya said. "You guys don't have to overdo it!"
They tried again.
"That's it. Put your earphones on, and we'll lay it in."
The rubber rims clasped Kid',; ears and damped the room's silence
down a level.
"I'm going to be playing something entirely different." Lanya's
voice was crisp and distant through the phones. "But I'll signal you
two in with my elbows." She flapped one at ,them and put on her own
phones. The vest swung from her sides. "There we-" she turned on
the tape. Momentarily the silence in Kid1s phones crackled- "go."
Kid heard Denny',; chair leg squeak; but it was on the ,tape.
Then, a long note bent.
Over it, Lanya began, as the beat cleared, to rattle out, like insects,
Palimpsest 521
high triplets, first here, then up half a step, then down a whole One.
Her mouth jerked across the organ and she dragged a growl up from
the windy lower holes. Then jerk: brig!)t triplets rattled. The old
melody wound, beneath them and decorated by them: each time the
third batch arrived, they thrust it into a new harmony. and toward
Kid's and Denny',; cadenced entrance:
Denny leaned forward, eyes wide, hands out and up, cradling an
invisible globe. Kid's fingertips tickled his palm ... His head was
down, to feel the rhythm; Ms eyes were wedged at the top of his
sockets, to watch her.
Lanya swung her whole body back and brought both elbows in to
her sides.
Denny's globe collapsed.
Kid's palm stung. And stung again. And again. And again-the
sound, and his head, rose-and again: his face burst with noise and
sudden joy.
Through the phones, from under his own cry. the rough fabric of
the ending, with the little trill falling into it again and again, secured
in its foreign key, brought all to its proper close.
Denny. still seated, looked about to explode. And, after five seconds
shouted: "Whoop-eee!" and bounced in his chair.
"You like that, huh?" Lanya grinned over her shoulder, ran the
tape back "\ want to lay in one more track You guys have to do the
same thing again." To Denny',; frown, she explained: "Because I want
it to sound like a whole room full of people clapping, not just you
two. See if you can shout on a different note. I mean, if you hooted
high before, hoot low. And vice versa."
"Sure," Denny said "Where'd you learn to do this?"
"Shhh," Lanya said. "Let's just do it. I don't have too much to play
on the harmonica this track But don't let what I do throw you off."
Kid nodded, pulled apart the phones at his ears-two rings of perspiration cooled'-then let them clamp back.
"Here we go.' She glanced back. "Ready?"
The crackle ...
The chaiT squeak ...
Then the long note, bending ...
Lanya reinforced the Hrst phrase with middle notes, dropped the
harp from her mouth, took a step back, and whistled a phrase over
the quiet beginning. One of the harmonicas, abready recorded, took
it up. Kid suddenly understood the movement between soft and
522 Dhalgrrn
loud built into the two tracks already down; Lauya whistled again..
Again the harmonicas carried the whistling into their organ-like development. She put the harp to her mouth, gave some bass strength
to another section, waited, glanced at Kid, at Denny. Another thirty
seconds of music gathered itself together: sliddenly she whistled
shrilly, and her elbows came down.
Kid and Denny clapped.
So did lanya, taking a large step back from the mike, bobbing her
head and whacking the back of her harmonica hand against her
palm. They clapped through the ringing five, and all shouted together with the voices already taped. Once more lanya was at the mike,
harp at her mouth, weaving high shatter-notes through the ending
tapestry.
Then silence.
She said, softly, breathing hard: "There . .. " and pressed a button.
The tapes halted. .
"JesliS ... !. Denny stooo. "That's wild! Where'd you get the tape
recorder? I mean, how'd you learn-:n
"Paul borrowed it from Reverend Taylor for me.»
"You do a lot of thatstulfbefore?" Dennyasked.
"Nope.' lanya took off her oWl> earphones, hung them overthe
mike's jutting bar. "It's just something I wanted to tryout. I've
worked with tapes before but-"
Kid said: "Let's hear the whole thingl" Taking off his earphones,
he came up beside her.
"What are YOli gonna call it?" Denny clacked his earphones down
on the table.
"-Watch it," Lanyasaid. uThose are delicate,1S
"Sorry-Whats its name?"
"For a while-" she ran her thumb across Kid's chest- "I was
thinking of calling it 'Prism, Mirror, Lens.' But then-D Denny disappeared in his ball of light; lanya squinted, stepped back- "what
with that big thing we saw up in the sky ... 1 don' t knOw. Maybe I'll
just call it 'Dilfraction.' I like that."
Holding his lips between his teeth, Kid nodded. "Go on.· His lips
came loose and tingled. "Play it.'
Denny rurned on like a frozen node of incandescent gas, moved
center floor.
Tapes turned.
"Here we go ... Jl
Palimpsest 523
Denny stilled.
" .. . I want you to note-" Lauya lay her harmonica on the table,
then raised one finger- "that something like that usually takes six or
eight hours to do; we have bee .. at this no more than twO hours.'
From the speakers beneath the table, Denny's chair leg squeaked.
Kid put his own phones down softly and listened (thinking: Temporal diffraction? Two hours? It had seemed perhaps twenty minutes!):
The long note bent.
Somehow; lost in a machine, I have been able to grasp and strip
from the body of experience three layers of living thesis: She inscribed them with her music, laid them over one another so that,
thinned by tape and transistors, their transparent silences and aural
aggregates) as she, the inventor, conceived them, clear for me; the invented one,at last. (On the tape lanya whistled and played with her
own whistling, the harmonica cradling its brittle, upper notes with
loW; breathy ones.) Is that where it goes (thinking:) when it goes?
This is melody and there-the shtill whistle which Kid realized now
was the real, musical Signal for the clapping to begin-which began!
He listened to a room full of people clap in time. One of the tracks
was beavily echoed and made the clapping seem to come from
dozens. The claps mounted; a final clap, and the dozens shoutedamong them he recognized his own voice, and Denny's, and lanya's;
but there were many others. Their shouts died over a discord nO single harmonica could make.
But probably any three cOlild.
The finale cleared in its higher, supporting key; trills of notes rell
into, and trills of notes rose out of, the moaning chord. The sound
clutched at him, tightened his stomach.
lanya listened, arms at her sides, head down, frowning with concentration. The white pips of her upper teeth dented one side of her
lip.
The piece ended.
She still listened.
Then Denny applauded and laughed. Another Denny, on top of
him, shouted, "Whoop-eee!" And Denny across the room, encased in.
light, said: "Hey, you know we got company in here? Look back
there . . . "
lanya's head came up suddenly. She turned off the tape.
Dennys light was over near the darkened corner. "Back behind the
blackboard there."
I
524 Dhalgren
"Huh?" Kid stepped forward.
"There's a big old nigger bitch in here, and, man, she's about to
shit!"
"Denny!" umya exclaimed, and ran through the edge of his light,
which turned, laughing, after her.
Kid pushed away the blackboard, looked down.
The board-stands wheels stopped creaking.
The woman wore a black hat and a black coat, hem rumpled on
the floor around her. She blinked up at them, feeling for the string
handles of the shopping bag beside her. Catching the bag up, she
breathed a word all wind.
"What do,you want?" umya asked. "Are you ... all right?"
The woman's eyes narrowed at the light that was Denny, came to
Kid's and widened. She blinked again. "You got juice and cookies ... "
"What?"
"This is the school?". Her voice was still breathy. "You got the juice
and the cookies for the children? Oh, I'm sorry!" Her knuckle rose to
dent her double chin, a gesture recalling June. "I thought I could get
some from here, you know? I live in Cumberland Park? And the store
where 1 go aU the time ain't got none no more. I go in there every day
and I get some every day, but I go in there yesterday and there just
ain't nothillg. Nothing at all. Oh, God ... from the children! I'm so
sorry! 1'1
"Then/' Lanya said, "why donlt you go to another store?"
"Oh, I'm sorry! I really am ... "
"You got juice and cookies?" Denny asked. "Whyrrt you give her
some?"
"Because this is ... " Lanya's lips worried the teeth behind them.
"You wait here." She walked from the circle of Dennys illumination;
Kid heard a door.
The wOman transferred her bag to the other hand. "Taking from
the chHdren. That's just so awful!" Her voice was weak and low as
some man's.
Lanya stepped back into the light. In one arm were two number
ten cans of grapefruit juice. III the other were two boxes of Tollhouse
cookies, glistening in cellophane. "You take these. But don't come
back here. Don't break in here and try and take stutI out. Find another store. Theres one four blocks up from here that still has things in
it. And there's, another one a block and a half down, right by the
burned-out dry cleaners."
Palimpsest 525
The woman, her tongue tip pink between her lips, blinking,
opened her bag.
The cans and boxes went chattering in.
Lanya walked to the front door and held it open.
The woman glanced at Kid, at Denny's light, quite distressed, and
stepped unsteadily forward. At the door she hesitated, suddenly
turned to Lanya: "You teach little children dressed like that, half
naked with your breasts all hanging out like that? Why, that's terrible!
It's a disgrace to God!' Then she £led, coat hem Swinging above her
splayed heels.
"Get that!" Denny (lights doused) ran forward. "You want us to
take back our God-damn juice and-I"
"Denny!" Lanya blocked him at the door.
"I mean will you get that shitll1 He turned in her restraining arms,
shaking his head. "Why'd you give her the damn stufI?"
"Oh, come on. Let's go! n
"I mean, God damn, she didn't even say whether or not she liked
yourmusid"
Lanya held on to Dennys shoulder: "Well, maybe if she was hungry
she dida't really care about the music. Hiding back there for a couple
ofhours-"
"Then what's she care that much about your tits for?" Denny
shrugged her hand away. ·She could've come out. We wouldn't've
done nothing. Shit!"
"Well, I'm not going to let it bother me," she said. "So don't let it
bother you."
Kid thought: How did she get in here in the first place? Then
thought: What was I just thinking ... It was something I wanted to
ask. "Yeah, let's go, huh?" He laughed, and thought: What was the
tho"ght that just slid off the tables of my mind?
Kid followed them outside. And thought: She is bothered.
"Close the door, will you?" l.Jmya said.
"By the way," Kid began, "How did she ... ?"
Denny glanced back at him.
Lanya didn't.
"You know?" Kid caught up to her. '" wonder if there're really any
children ever in there? I mean I'm having a harder and harder time
believing in anything I don't-"
"Huh?" Lanya looked up.
Deep in thought, she hadn't heard.
He grinned at her and rubbed the back of her neck. "'Diffraction,'"
he said. "Ilike it."
"Mmmm." She leaned her head back and shook it. Hair brushed
his hand and wrist.
"What are you going to do with it?" he asked.
She shrugged: "I don't knOw. What are you going to do with your
poems?"
He shrugged. "Maybe write ... some more."
She slipped her shoulder under his arm. "Mayhe I'll compose some
male ... maybe." Suddenly she said: "A disgrace to God?-really!"
Denny, who waJked along the curb, picking at his chest, glanced
back. And grinned. .
What she's thinking, Kid thought, is seldom what it looks like she's
thinking. Sometimes (as he walked, he catalogued incidents) he'd
found her thoughts far simpler than her complicated expression of
them. Other times (this catalogue was longer) more complex.
Denny, holding his chains with both hands and walking with his
head down,. to examine what was beside his feet, was easier, nastier,
duller and (the attraction beyond the body) predictable.
Lmya lifted her harmonica (when, Kid tried to remember, had she
snatched it up from the table inside? But that was lost too, with the
others) toward her mouth. Her hair pulled from his forearm as she
stepped ahead of him; his arm slid down the vest, fell.
She bent over the silver organ. Then she lowered it. Then tumed
it in her hands. Then she raised it. Then she lowered it again.
2
At the head of the stairs, Kid bent to scratch Muriel, who licked furiously at the ham of his thumb.
Madame Brown came into the hall and said, "Now I didn't even
know you'd gone outside! I could have sworn I'd heard you back in
Lanya's room just now. Would you like wine, or coffee?"
"Could I have both?" Denny asked.
"Certainly."
"Just wine for me,· Lanya said. "Thaes probably what you want,
too, right?"
"Yeah," Kid said. "Thanks."
They followed Madame Brown into the kitchen.
"You want to come to my party?" Kid asked. "Up at Mr Calkins'."
Palimpsest 527
"The one hes giving for your book, that everybody!; been talking
about?" Madame Brown smiled. Her necklace glittered.
"Huh? Yeah. I guess thats it."
"I'd be delighted."
Lanya, legs crossed, raised the front feet of her chair. "He hasn't
invited me, .yet." Above her, in the grey window; an asparagus rern
turned on a string.
"Oh, you know you two are invited." Kid sat on the kitchen stool.
"You got a party? Up at Calkins'?" Denny, hands in his pockets,
leaned on the stove. He moved to let Madame Brown get the enameled coffee pot.
She said: "That should be quite something."
"He said bring about twenty or thirty friends. I'm going to bring
the whole nest up."
"Marvelous!" Lanya clapped her hands. "I'm sure thats :"'hat he
wants."
"Yeah? You think so?"
Madame Brown, dubious, set out glasses and picked the gallon jug
up from the floor. "Well, it will be interesting." She twisted at the
cap, her face lining with effort. "It's in three Sundays, isn't it?" The
cap seemed stuck. "Mary will never forgive me if I go. She's invited
me for dinner. But I wouldn't miss it for the world. •
"Here. I'll do it." Kid opened the bottle and poured out yellow
wine. "You got lots of patients here?"
Madame Brown, seated in what looked like a lawn chair, observed
her glass .• A few. Would you like to come and have a session with tne
some afternoon? 11 ,
Kid looked up. Aod thought: I'm embarrassed. Why?
"Lanya's told me about some of the things you were feeling, and
how upset you'd been. And about your memory problems. If you'd
like to talk about them with someone, I'd be very happy to."
"Now?"
Lanya rocked in her chair.
Denny; sitting at the table now; looked back and forth between his
wine glass and coffee cup.
"Goodness, no. Perhaps some afternoon next week. That would be
best for me. I'm terminating sessions with two patients, and if we
want to work out something further, it would be a little easier to
make arrangements."'
·Ob, • Kid said. "Yeah. You give therapy to people now?"
528 Dhalgnm
"Yes, I have been for quite a while now."
Lanya said, "I told Madame Brown you'd been in therapy before."
"You told her I'd been in a mental hospita!?"
"You mentioned that to me once yourself, n Madame Brown said.
Kid drank some wine. "Yeah. I'd like to cOme and talk to you.
Thanks. That's nice of you.'
"You think he's crazy?" Denny asked. He'd only drunk from the
colIee. "He acts pretty {mmy sometimes. But I don't think he's crazy.
Not like Dollar." He looked over his cup at Madame Brown and explained: "Dollar's killed somebody already. Beat his head in with a
pipe. Now Dollar's a real nut. You wanna talk to him?"
"You shut up, huh?" Kid said.
Madame Brown said: "I'm afraid I don't have facilities for handling
... nuts. 'Crazy' and 'nuts' are terms doctors don't use-or
shouldn! t. But, no, I don't think Kid's crazy at aU."
Denny's head had gone. to the side and his tongue into his cheek,
listening for patronization. His mouth changed shape over the cup.
He'd apparently found it.
"I don't want to start any long-term thing," Kid said, "where I
come back and back-yeah, 1 know how it works. But I just
don't want to get into that.'
"Whether or not you needed something long term would more or
less depend on what we found out in the first sessions, wouldn't it?
So we'll do first things first."
"Okay ... " Kid felt wary.
"You know-" Lanya's chair legs came down- "that whole thing
about Dollar killing Wally has really got me upset.'
"What is this," Madame Brown asked, "about someone killing
somebody?"
So they told her,
"Now h. sounds nuts.' Madame Brown nodded.
"Oh, he that nuts," Denny answered.
Madame Brown sighed: "Well, 1 suppose that afternoon did provide some extenuating circumstances. n But she sounded more worried than convinced.
The bell rang.
"Well, my break is over." Madame Brown left the room.
As soon as she'd gone, Denny said: "Did you know that while you
were asleep last night, the guys had two girls in the back they were
shaggiog? Man, them niggers really went to town! I used to watcll a
Palimpsest 529
lot, but I never took no turn before. One of them, the little white one,
she was freaky, man! Really. Freaky. Glass said I could ,take a turn, if I
wanted.' He revolved the cup to align the handle with a crack between the table boards. "So I did. To come, though, I had to pretend-"
Denny glanced at Kid-"stuff with you.'
"You been busy, huh?" Kid hadn't known; he was surprised.
Denny looked at Lanya. "I pretended about you too."
"' don't know whether I should be flattered or not." She rocked
her chair again. "I've always pictured myself as a pretty worldly
young lady, but you guys have a way of making me feel like I just got
Ollt oIa convent. Not-" she let the chairlegs down-"thatI'm trying
to keep up ... well, maybe I am, just a little." She stood, stepped
around the table corner, and put a hand on either side of Denny's face,
which rotated between her palms, mouth opened. She dropped her
mouth on his. He held the edge of the table and strained his neck to
kiss her. Finally, he let go with one hand and put it around her waist.
"Hey-" he pulled his face away from hers- "that's nice," giggled,
and kissed her again.
Kid's laughter made them look.
"What would you do," Kid said, "if I brought the whole nest
around and had them all lined up, taking turns?"
Leaning against Denny's shoulder, Lan)'ll frowned. "1 wouldn't put
it past you, you bastard ... Naw; that's not true. You wouldn't." She
glanced down and sat ,on Denny's knee. Denny immediately settled
one hand over her breast and frowned at her. "Gang bangs, chains,
leather-it isn't my scene,"
"I've got a hard-on," Denny said.
'You've had a hard-on ever since I met you," Lanya told him.
"Look, you two: two guys making it together turns me on. That's all.
Most of my friends have always been gay. That's what I dig."
"I know a lot of guys who dig dikes," Denny said.
Lanya bit his ear.
"Owww ... !"
"Anyway,' she said, "that's the turn-on for me. Not getting gangshagged."
"Glib." Kid rocked his stool legs now. "But logical.'
"r think you look cute in my vest," Denny said. "You think I look
cute without it?U
"As a bug, babes," Lanya laid him.
"Hey,' Denny said. "Are you mad at me?"
"No," she said. "Just a little confused." She looked at Kid. "r can
never figure out if you're the person I keep thinking you are."
Kid stood up, walked over, and stopped with his hands On Lanya's
shoulders, his legs astraddle Denny's knee. "If I talk about you
screwing Denny or me, it's for real. If I talk about you screwing anybody else, I'm joking. See? And you can do or talk about whatever
you want."
"And I think you misunderstand me entirely-" she nodded with
a look both wary and wry-"sometimes.'
He kissed her (face turning between his palms) and had to bend
his legs. She turned her head gently back and forth, rubbing his
tongue with hers, and meshed her fingers behind his neck, pulling
him down, harder. Finally he had to setde his weight on Dennys
thiglL Denny took Kid's shoulder with one hand. The knuckles of the
moved against Kids breast, fondling hers. Kids hands slid between Lanyas back and Dennys belly.
"Both of you," Denny said, "weigh more than I do. Either me or
the chair is gonna go, one. n
Lanya laughed into Kid's mouth.
"l.etS go back into your room and ball.' Kid said.
He had actually thought one or the other of them would protest.
Geoff Rivers
Kit Darkfeather
David Wise
Michael Roberts
Jerry Shank
Frank Yoshikami
Harold Redwing
Madeleine Teny
Priscilla Meyer
George Newman
Ann Harrison
Thomas Sask
Arthur Pearson
Earl Rudolph
Phillip Edwards
Virginia Colson
Hank Kaiser
Gary Disch
Alvin Fischer
Susan Morgan
William Dhalgren
Peter Weldon
Linda Evers
Preston Smith
At her desk, he read the list for the sixth time. The sky beyond the
bay window, dense and low, darkened toward evening. or
Rudolph, Rivers Qr Evers: Fantasize a persona for any. Which, he
pondered, would I pick myself? Some permui'ation ... Gary Morgan,
Palimpsest 531
Terry Rivers, Thomas Weldon? None was his. Was one perhaps nearer
than the other? No ... if they are all real people, he reflected, then
each is just as important. Hey, Kamp, isn't this what that democracy);
about that put you up on ... a moon? (But I don't want one. I need
one about as much as I need a handful of dollars.) Ups tight, he
picked up the papers: Three from the phone pad, two pieces of
newsprint, the back, blank pages of a paperback, some sheets of
Lanya's paper-all he had written since Brass Orchids. I promised not
to write any more; N ewboy promised I would. Kid smiled, pUlling
one paper behind the other. He slipped Brass Orchids from beneath
the notebook, opened it, closed it, opened it again. Holding it on his
palm too long made his stomach ache. Such a strange, marvelous,
and marvelously inadequate object! He was still unable to read it
through. He still tried. And tried again, and tried till his throat was
constricted, his forearms wet, and his heart hammered down where
he'd always thought his liver was. Neither dislike nor discomfort
with the work explained that. Rather the book was lodged in
some equation where it did not belong, setting off hyperradicaIs and
differentials through aU the chambers of his consciousness. He
looked over at the notebook, read what was on the page behind the
list:
Lingual synthesis: Wittgenstein, Ltvi-Strauss, Chomshy-l
suspect it is what they were getting at: Attempts to reduce vast
fields of Philosophy, Anthropology, and Linguistics to sets of parameters that not so much define as mirror the way in which philosophical, anthropological, and linguistic infonnation respectively
fit into, upon, and around the mind itself. Those particularly
parametric works (the Tractatus, La Geste d'AsdiWlll, .Syntactic
Structures- though all three men have written much longer
works, work of this type must be very short; none of these is
above 30 thousand words) do not discuss fields Of study; they drop
careful, crystalline catalysts, which on any logical mind (as opposed to trained minds familiar with galleries of evidence and
evaluations) perforce generate complicated and logical discussions of the subject using whatever evidence is at hand, limited
only by the desire or ability to retain interest in the dialogue propagating in the inner ear.
In an age glutted with information, this "storage method" is,
necessarily, popular. But these primitive
532 Dhalgren
WaS the end of the page. He did not turn to the next. Wittgenstein.
Levi-Sttauss, Chomsky: He mulled their sounds. A year, a year and a
half ago, he had read everything he could find by one.
He had never heard ofth. other two.
"Lingual synthesis ... " That was nice on the tongue. ' ... particularly parametric works . .. " He picked up Brass Orchids, balanced it
on blunt fingers. " ... careful, crystalline catalysts ... " He nodded. A
particulady parametric work of careful, crystalline catalysts in tingual synthesis. "Ihat, at any rate, was the type of object it ought to be.
Wet!, it was sharI.
One of them turned in the bed.
One of them turned again.
He looked across the rOom:
The tent of a knee. An arln aver an arm.
"Ihe chair back was cool against his. Caning prickled the bottom
of one thigh. The plants leaned from their pots.
He pinched the bright chain across his belly.
Darkones coiled the clothing on the floor.
Suppose, he thought, she wants me to stay and him to go. Well, I
get rid of the bastard. Suppose she wants me to go? I get rid of all the
bastards.
But she won't. She likes privacy too much. Why else would she go
along with this? Along? something in me would like to have it that
she is doing this for me. But all joy in it comes from those moments
when it is obviously as real as her music and personally otherwise.
I am restless.
She turns restlessly.
His arm, limp, mOVes with her moving shoulder.
Lanya blinked, raised her head. Kid watched her eyes close and
her head lay down. He was smiling. He turned Brass Orchids in his
hands, turned the loose pages, as though he might heft, through
some quality other than weight, the difference.
The notebook waS open again at the list. Puzzling, he read the
names once more (it waS almost too dark), this time right to left, bottom to top:
Preston Smith
Linda Evers
Peter Weldon
William Dhalgren
Susan MOlgan ...
ThomasSask
Ann Harrison
George Newman
Priscilla Meyer
Madeleine Tony . ..
Palimpsest 533
3
·Why'd she kick us out?"
"She didn't kick us out. She had things to do. She'll be down to see
us. Don't worry. n
"I ain't worrying." Denny balanced along the curb edge. "Shit, I
could have stayed up there for the rest of my life and been happy. You
on one end and her on the other."
"How'd you manage to eat?"
"Present company excepted-" Denny tugged at his vest- "I'd
just send out for it. You sure she wasn't mad at us?"
"Yeah."
"Okay ... you really think she's gonna corne down and visit the
nest?'"
"If she doesn't, we'll go up and see her. She'll come."
'She's a nice person!" Denny emphasized each stress with a beat of
his chin. "And I really like that song. 'Diffraction: huh?"
Kid nodded.
"I hope she comes down. I mean I know she likes you, 'cause you
wrote a book and everything, and you know her a.1ong time. But I'm
just a fuck-up. She ain't got no reason to like me."
·She does anyway."
Denny frowned. "Sure acts like it, don't she?"
The street light above them pulsed ... at half strength; then died.
sky sheeted over with one more mm of darkness. The only other
light to corne on was two blocks away; it pulsed, pulsed, pulsed again.
Someone moved into it and shouted, "Hey! Hey, Kid! Denny!"
Others trooped into ,the wavering circle.
"What the hen are they doing here?"
Denny shrugged.
In the middle of the next block, Dollar, lugging the brass lion on its
broken base, pushed between Copperhead and Jack the Ripper. "Hey,
we gotla move, you know? We're mavin' again!" Dollar was grinning.
Copperhead was not. "The fuckin' house burnt up on us! How
like The fuckin' house burnt up!" A knapsack, one green
WIth hlS rallgoes, swung about his shins. He hefted the strap to the
otherhaad.
"Jesus," Denny said. "All my shit ... ?"
"What happened?"
"Nothin'," Copperhead shrugged. 'You know ... it just, well .... "
"The whole damn block," Siam said .• About an hour ago. Shil, it
was something!"
534 Dhalgr£ll
Kid felt his heart thump once (like it always did when he found
out somebody he knew had died) and in the hollow remains, he
thought: That isn't so much a reaction as it is a fear of what the reaction might be. The house burnt down? The ... house burnt down?
But that seOlDS So easy. The house ...
He asked: "Was Nightmare there?"
"Fuck," Copperhead said. "Fuck. He and the u.dy was off somewhere. Thirteen was gone somewhere too. Fuck."
Glass chuckled. "I cOldd smell Thirteens stash burning right up.
Sure wished 1 knew where he kept it, and 1 would have got it out for
him. But when it was burning-" he swung a pillowcase down from
his shoulder into his armS- "you sure could smell it. You know 1
been in seven God-damn fires. Seven times I had my house burn Out
from under me. LDst my mother in a God-damn fire."
"In Bellona?" Siam asked.
Glass looked at Siam, realization in his face that he had been misunderstood. "No .. ." He hugged up the pillowcase. "r ain't been in
no fire in Bellona, except this one."
"Where are we going to move?"
Denny said, "You want to go back to Lanyas and see if she'll put
us-"
"Not on your fucking life,' Kid said.
"1 mean, n Denny questioned, "you said she. wasn't mad at us
none."
"You got some place for us to move?" Copperhead asked.
"Nope," Kid said. II Come On. We'n find- one. D
"Now we don't want no place that's gonna hum up again before
we get in it," Copperhead said. "Do we?"
Scorpions mumbled outside the circle of the lamp. Some carried
mattresses, some cartons, some shovels and tools.
"Come on down this street," and the cavalcade practically filled
the alley. Trees had been planted and ringed with ornamental fences.
But each trunk was charred to a black fork with twisted tines, "That
wooden house must have gone up like a matchbook."
"Naw," Copperhead told him. "And nobody got hurt. Nobody didn't
really lose nothing they didn't want to lose. We all got out in time."
"I got the lion!"
Kid turned On Dollar's pocked and stubbled grin.
"Man, I wouldn't've left my lion behind for nothing. It's the only
tuckin' thing I own. You got that for me, Kid, remember? You got that
, Palimpsest 535
for me and I wouldn't leave behind nothing like that for anything in
the world, you know?"
"Denny ... ?"
Behind Dollar, she pushed her way forward. Her arms were full,
her hair was tangled, and one heavy cheek was smudged.
"Denny; I got your stuff out!"
Her eyes, sweeping among them, caught Kid's and swept away.
"Denny? I think I got it all ... "
"Oh, wow!" Denny said. nOh, hey; you did? Wow, that's great!"
"Here: I got your shirts." She caught up with them. "And-" she
glanced up blankly at Kid; the heavy breasts in her blue sweatshirt
pressed out against bags and packages. Her small, full fingers had left
the brown paper sweaty so that it bellied between them- "and the
posters down from your wall. And ,the picture books. I didn't bring
the blankets ... I didn't bring the blankets because I thought it
wouldn't be too hard to get some more blankets-"
"You got my radio?"
"Of course 1 got your radio. I think I got everything-there wasn't
very much--;,xcept the blankets."
"I don't care about the God-damn blankets," Denny said. "You
okay? I mean the house was burning down, and you were back up in
there getting my stuff?" He took a paper bag from her-
«Oh, watch out ... ! n
-pulled Brass Orchids from his back pocket and dropped it inside.
"'What's that?!!
"Nothin', What you so curious about? Oh, hey! You got my game
in there.'"
"Un-huh. Denny?"
"Why don't you let me carry the rest of those?"
"That's all right. Denny?"
"What?"
"I don't think me and myfriend-"
She glanced back.
Kid did too.
The blond girl in the pea jacket was just them.
"-are going to stay with you guys any more. I just wanted to
bring you your stuff."
"Hey," Denny said. "Why not?"
"I don't know." She adjusted the other bags. "We just want to go
somewhere else. We don't want to be members. And we know some
536 Dhalgren
nice people who have a house where we thought we could stay. Its
just girls there."
"Just girls?" Denny said. "You ain't gonna have no fun there."
"Boys can visit stuff like that. Boy.s just dOl,'t JiIlL there. 1 just
don't think I want to live with you guys any more. 1 mean after the
fire-" once more she glanced at Kid-"and everything. You know;"
"Jesus," Denny said. "Jesus Christ. Well, 1 mean, I guess so, if you
doni t want to any more. n
"You can come visit me, too. If yOU' want. H
"Shit,' Denny said. "God damn.'
"I just think it would be better. I mean if I live someplace else. Itl;
a very nice place. They're very nice girls. "
Denny was looking into the bag.
She said: "r'm pretty sure I got everything. What are you looking
for? If it's not in there, it's probably in here.·
"I'm not looking for anything.'
"Oh."
The mask of Kid's face tingled. Suddenly he turned to Copperhead. "You ever been in any of these houses?"
"'No."
"Let's try that one."
"Sure.1t
Kid turned to the others. "Heyl Hold up there, will you?" He
walked up the unpainted steps. Halfway. he glanced back:
She shifted paper bags in her arms, biting at her lip while trying to
get them comfortllble. Denny looked at her, then at Kid, then back at
her. The others shumed and talked.
In his hand, the knob's squared and toothy shaft slid oUt another
inchKid pushed the door in.
The loose ceiling fixtureHe ran his eyes over the hall, waiting for sounds of occupancy.
The crayoning on the dirty wallHe had the oddest feeling. "Anybody home?"
"Well, if they are," Copperhead said, "they can damn well get
ready to move the fuck out. 'Cause we .::ome to pay a long viSit,
right?" Others laughed. Copperhead called up: "Does it look okay?"
"Yeah. It looks pretty ... "
"Should we come on up?"
come on."
Palimpsest 537
At the end of the hall the bathroom door was open. Footsteps behind him passed around him; and somebody carrying the chained
mannequin pushed by.
The house came alive with scorpions.
With a feeling of suspended .::onfusion, he wandered through the
front room into the kitchen.
Copperhead was looking in the cabinets above the sink. "Whole lot
of canned stuff. That's pretty good. Too bad they left all their garbage
though." A bag had broken under the table. The table was piled with
garbage. The sink and the counter were heaped with dishes.
Kid decided he didn't like it here.
Outside the screen door, the sky heaved and twisted like a chained
thing.
He turned abruptly into the living room.
The blond git! in the pea jacket sat on the couch, fists between her
knees, watching two scorpions layout a mattresS on the floor. She
looked at Kid, hunched her shoulders, and looked back at the scorpions. She seemed very tired.
"Hey, man," Dollar said behind his shoulder, "this is a really fme
place." Clutching his lion, he shouldered open a door across the hall.
Several guys were inside, straightening out mattresses and sleeping
bags. Dollar pushed his way among them to set the lion in the window. He turned, silhouetted before the torn window shade. The brass
beast peered by his hip from the sill. "Hey. man. You shouldn't have
brought that old burned-up mattress with us. It's gonna smell up the
whole fuckin' place." On the ticking was a charred halo around a
crater two feet across of ashes and burned cottoo.· .
the only one I had,' the scorpion (another white guy named
California) said, and yanked it across the floor. He dropped the corner to overlap another.
Newspaper and magazine pictures had been at one time pasted
over the wall; then some of them ripped off.
A black scorpion Kid dido't know stood up and grinned. "This
sure beats the place we Were staying, hey, Kid?" Squinting, he looked
around. "Yeah, this is pretty nice,"
I prefer, Kid thought, the red eyes, God damn it!
Across the hall, the door to the service porch was open. He started
in, and stopped, one hand on the jamb. There was neither glass nor
screening in the windows. Siam sat on a crate. "Hey . . .' He pulled
the newspaper into his lap and looked at Kid with growing confu-
538 Dhalgr.m.
sion. "I was •.. was reading the paper." Siam offered a smile, thought
bener, and took il back. "Just reading tbe paper." He stood; tbe paper
fell on the floor. The boards had once been painted maroon. "Is there
something you want me to do .. . ? I was gOllRa help out with the
moving, but my hand ... " He gestured with his bandaged arm. At the
place where the bandage wrapped his hand, the flesh was scaling. "I
guess I can help set up some stuff," Siam said, looking at his grimy
fingers. "If you want ... ?"
"Naw," Kid saM. "Naw, that's all right."
The verdigrised spigot on the waH splashed on the muddy drain.
Somethlng clanked and ground behind him.
Kid turned.
The Ripper and Devastation wheeled the Harley up the ball:
"I don't see why you wanted to bring this piece of junk along. You
can't get no gas for it, and you say the motor's all shot anyway."
"Well, irs a good bike, if I. could get it fixed."
'You want to pUt it in the bathroom like last time?"
'Shit, these cocksuckers get drunk atld don't aim at all. And you
know one of 'em's gonna piss on it just to see it rust .•
fI. Aw, come on., motherfucker ........ !1
"No, man! Hey, Denny, can I put it in there?"
"I guess so." Denny stood by a doorway, both arms full of paper
bags.
Kid walked up to him, took his shoulder. "She go?"
Lips pursed, Denny nodded, looking from one bag to the other..
Inside, someone leaned the shovels against the wall beside an ironingboard.
They backed up the Harley ,to wheel it in.
"Hey, is this gonna be your room, Kid?"
Kid said, "Probably.'
'It ain't gonna (aka up too much space. Later I can maybe find
some place else for it, you know?"
'If itl; in the Kid's room, nobody's gonna bother it."
okay."
Kid squeezed Denny's shoulder. They stepped inside.
'Hey," Denny said. "It's got a loftf"
Kid's spine chilled. He stood very stilt "Denny?"
'What?"
'Did the place where we came fromh.ve a loft?"
Denny looked puuled. 'Sure it did. But it wasn't as nice as this
one."
Palimpsest 539
"It wasn't?"
"This one's a lot bigger," Denny said. "And it's got a mattress on it."
"What was the place like we were living before?"
ClHuh?"
"Describe it to me. I can't remember it. 1 can't . .. remember anything about it."
"What do you mean?"
UWhat color were the walls painted?"
"White. wereRJt theyr
Frowning, Kid nodded. The walls about them were green.
"You really don't remember where we lived before?"
Kid shook his head.
"We had," Denny began, prompting, "a bunch of spades across the
street from us? It was down about eight or nine streets from here.
And over a little.·
"How did it compare to here?·
"What . . . do you mean?" Denny asked again.
"How is this place different?"
"Shit; Denny said. "This place is about twice as big! Don't you remember how cracked the walls aRd everything were? This place is in
pretty good condition." After a moment, Denny asked: "Is this gonna
be your place?"
"I guess SO, n Kid said.
"Can I put some of my shit up ,there? These cocksuckers will walk
off with anything you just leave around.·
"Sure. Go ahead."
Denny flung up one of the bags, then the other. "I sure wish this
one had a ladder. You're supposed to really climb up and down this
thing?" The supporting beam had triangular notches cut into the
side. Denny climbed up two, and looked back. "Hey, it ain't that hard
.. . you really don't remember where we were before?"
WI guess . .. no. n
'Wow; Denny said and pulled himself up onto the mattress. "You
lived there an awful fuclting long time.' He looked at Kid again,
frowned, responding to something Kid could feel moving in his face
but could not ideRtHy. " .. . maybe not that long; Denny recanted,
dubiously. He disappeared.
More people moved in the hall behind him.
"Hey; Kid," somebody said, but was gone when he looked.
He went to the post and climbed up after DeRny. In the corner, he
sat back and watched the boy thumbtack Koththe Dark Aogel neltt
5'/0 Dhalgren
to the day-glo Scorpio. Now Dewy emptied the other bags between
his kRees. "I guess," he said after a moment, "she really got it aH.
That was pretty nice of her, hOO?"
Kid nodded.
Denny crawled over the mattress, hesitated, then put his head in
Kid's lap. Kid rubbed Dennys neck, looked down, surprised. Denny
took two deep breaths.
Hes gonna cry ... ? Kid wondered.
"You all right?" Denny asked in a perfectly controlled voice.
"Yeah," Kid said. "What about you?"
"I'm fine," Denny said, listlessly. After a while, he said, "l'm gonna
go down and check things out, huh?"
"Okay."
He sat alone, listening to the sounds of the house. Once he
picked up Dennys radio and turned it on. There was not even stalic.
No battery?
He turned the glass dice, watching reflected ghosts of his face. He
turned up a mirror on his chain; comparison of tbe two images told
him nothing. But he looked back and forth.
Someone banged on the boards beneath him.
"Hey, you up there? Kid?"
He opened his eyes; the dice rolled from his lap as he crawled to
loft's edge.
Black eyes, broken looth, hair with a braid undone: Between huge
shoulders, the smooth and the scarred, Nightmare grinned. "Hey,
you got yourself a real nice nest set up for you here, huh?"
"How you doin', man!' Kid swung his legs over, dropped to the
floor. His body tingled, heels, chin, knuckles and knees.
Nightmare took a stiff step back, another to the side, and bobbed
his head. "Yeah, you really got yourself set up. Really nice." He
looked into the hall, nodded at SOmeone who hailed bim. 'Stealin' all
my folk away from me?" He glanced back, brows high and forehead
furrowed "You're welcome to the scroungy motherfuckers! The niggers are okay. But the white ones, man. Shit ... !"
Dollar said,. "Hey, Nightmare-"
Shoulders raised; head lowered, Nightmare spat on the floor.
Dollar swallowed, and disappeared at a gesture of Nightmare's fist.
Nightmare turned, annoyance and COncern weighting the ends of
his eyebrows, the corners of his mouth. "fuckin' psycho! You golla
treat these bastards like horse turds, man! Like fuckin' monkey puke!
They all like you now. But you're gonna have go show 'ern soon." He
Palimpsest 5,/1
turned his boot on the gobbet" And watch out for the ladies, they are
particularly bad."
"Nightmare," Kid said, "Most of the time, 1 can't even tell which
ones the ladies are!'
"Got a point there." Nightmare nodded. "Altogether, how many
you got here?"
"Don't knOw. 11
"I never did neither." \n the hall, Nightmare squinted at the ceiling. 'Yeah, this is going to be interesting."
Kid followed him.
"Somebody told me you fool around with boys, huh?" Nightmare
nodded again, considering. "\ was in reform school for years. Yeah, \
know about that shit." He leaned out on the service porch (where
two blacks manhandled a chipped washing machine), and pulled
back, still nodding. "So you got Copperhead, Glass, and Spitt all here
in the nest with you. That's pretty cool, \ guess. 1 wouldn't have the
balls for that I tell you that now."
"Which one is Spitt?"
Nightmare'S face swung back, rnptured with disbelief. "Which one
is Spitt?' Disbelief erupted into mockery. "You wanna know whicb
one is Spitt?" Mockery erupted into laughter. "Hey, Spitt! Corne
here." He turned in the hall.
"Yeah?" The white youth came from the room. A matted belly,
massing toward the pubic, disappeared under a turquoise and silver
buckle. A scar careened across the tight, bald pectoral, and turned
down toward Ills navel. He wore no vest. His only chain was his projector. Wrists aad forearms were furry, his biceps veined and baM.
His cheeks wore the few hairs of someone who could never have a
beard. "What you want1"
"The Kid here thought he'd like a formal introduction. Kid, this is
SpitL Spitt, this is the Kid."
"Huh?" Spitt said. "Eh ... Hi." He wiped a wet hand on his black
jeans and held it out.
"HI," Kid said, but didn't shake.
Spilt put down his hand and looked u9.comfortable. "I was in the
kitchen, trying to wash up some of the God-damn dishes. They ain't
gonna stay clean very long, but 1 thought for the first day, maybe. Did
you want something?"
"You go on back," Kid said. "Nightmare'S a clown, you know?
Yeah, and throw out SOme of that garbage, huh?"
"\ was gonna." Spitt's eyes flicked, questioning, between them. He
542 Dhalgnm
looked down, moved his feet a couple of times, grunted, then went
into the other room.
"Now you mean to tell me you don't know who put the split in
Spites tit?" Nightmare demanded; with his finger, he flicked the Orchid hanging at Kid's neck. It ticked and chattered in the chains.
After silent seconds Nightmare, aping frustration, shook his head
and assumed a theatrical whisper. "He's the guy you cut, man, when
him and Glass and Copperhead first beat the shit out of you up at
Calkins'! You mean you didn't know that?" Nightmare's expelled
"Hal" of laughter made at least two of the scorpions in the front hall
turn around. They turned back. One, a black woman, was hammering
a nail into the wall, using a piece of plank to hit with. "They been
tellin' me you're a little punchy sometimes, too. Like ytJU're not always
there, you know? Well, I tell 'em just to watch out for you, huh? The
Kid knows what hes doing better than any of you motherfuckers, I
tell 'em.'"
"Glad you think so," Kid said. "You going to stay here?"
"Me?" Nightmare buried a thumb in the links looping his chest.
"Am 1 gonna stay here, with these scroungy motherfuckers?" The
thumb wagged. The links raltled. "ShiU"
"What about you and Dragon u.dy?"
"We're around, you know. Dragon u.dy used to have this all-suede
gang, man, over on the edge of Jackson. You know where Cumberland Park is?"
Kid nodded.
"Man, they were SOme mean motherfuckers. I meant man . .. "
Nightmare looked in the living room again, stepped inside.
Kid followed.
On the table in the COTOer were stacked a dozen copies of Brass
Orchids.
"You got to watch out, down there," Nightmare said. "I mean its
getting pretty hungry, down there. Since the water main broke, it's
just been sort of terrible. Two guys I know already got killed, down
there. Yesterday. And somebody else two days before that."
HI heard most of the people moved.·
"And the ones ,that are left, roaR, are pretty God-damn strange,
you better believe it. Dragon u.dy got her nest down there. SheS pretty cool, you know?"
"And you're really going to leave all this for me?"
"I don't want it." Nightmare frowned at the table.
Palimpsest 543
"Why?"
.. "You asked me that already."
"And I may God-damn well ask you ten times more, too! Until I
find out."
"I told you I was just curious-"
"Me! Why mel" (The three scorpions who came through the room
now and didn't look were making a noticeable effort.) "Come on,
Nightmare. Talk to me."
"Well; you come." Nightmare turned around and leaned his butt
on the table edge. "You go. You got a certain style." He shook back
his hair. "You're crazy. People say you don't even know who you are.
Thaes okay by me. I don't want nobody asking about u.rry H. Jonas
before he come here, either-Then, every once in a while, you do
something really crazy-ass brave." Nightmare gripped the edges of
the table. "Now I ain't brave. I think anybody who is, is stupid. I'm
just not so spaced out today I can't remember what I did yesterdaywhich is more than I can say for you. I think thats the only reason I
ended up the boss." He shrugged. "Now you got it. You don't want it,
you just take off an them chains, ban up in a little ball, throw 'em
in Honand u.ke and go on do something else. Somebody else'n pick
it up-Copperhead, Raven, u.dy of Spain ... maybe some nigger you
don't even know their name yet.' Nightmare's face twisted. "But I
don't see you doing that, you know?" He pawed something from his
back pocket, brought it up between them. "And this shit-" A copy
of Brass Orchids, folded. "You know I been actually trying to read
this? I don't understand shit like this, man! But every day for a
fuckin' week you got a fuckin' page or half-page in the fuckin' newspaper. Like it was a fuckin' movie, or something." Nightmare turned,
and with his book knocked the stack. Copies spread the table. Three
ren on the floor. 'You don't ever talk about it; least I never heard
you." Nightmare turned the folded book. "It ain't got no name on it.
I mean I don't even know if it was really you wrote the stuff. I mean
thaes what some people are saying. But I'm gonna look at it anyway,
see? And I'm looking. Ihen I find that part about mBI"
Kid frowned.
Nightmare conducted the next sentence with the folded book.
"Yeah, you know; don't tell me you didn't put nothing about me in
there.» He opened the cover, brushed over the pages.
Kid stepped around to see.
"Here!" Nightmare thumped the page with bunched fingers, leav-
544 Dhalgren
ing four prints. "That ain't me you talkin' about?" The whole page
was grey with marks, the corners limp.
Kid took the book. The next page was clean. So was the page before. "Yeah . . .• Kid said. "I guess I had you in mind when I was
writing that."
"You did?" The question's falling inflection rang with mistrust.
Kid nodded, closed the book and thought how inaccurate a truth
he was perpetrating.
"Oh." Nightmare pulled the book from him. The pages parted automatically at the questioned passage. "Well, reading a fuckin' book
and finding somebody talkin' about you is some pretty weird shit,
you know? I mean I haven't made up my mind whether I like it ...
course, you didn't say anything bad about me.· Once more he nodded., pursed his lips, parted them in a silent shape: "You don't say
anything good, either." Again he stared at Kid. "That is pretty weird.
I just wish I understpod shit like this better, you know?" Suddenly; a
grin opened around Nightmare:. broken tooth. "That re .. lly is me,
huh? And you weren't puttia' me down or nothing? I told Dragon
Lidy that was me, and she tried to tell me I was full of shit. You just
wait till I tell her." He folded the book, tapped Kid's arm with it, and
stabbed at his back pocket a couple of times, till it went in. "You are a
very strange person. And you do Some very strange things." Nightmare stood up and walked out of the room.
Kid saw Spitt and Glass, who had been standing just inside the
kitchen door, going toward the table.
Nightmare mumbled very loudly:
"Toomuch,n
"You want to come to a party?" Kid called after Nightmare in the
hall.
"Here?"
"At Roger CaIkins'."
Nightmare:. head went to the side. "What am I gonna do at a party
up ,there?"
"It's my party. Calkins is giving it for me at his place. Bring Dragon
Lidyalong."
"Just your friends? In his place?"
"His friends, too. It
"Oh," Nightm .. re said. "She ain't gonna come without her sidelights."
"Adam and Baby?"
palimpsest 545
"Yeah."
"That's all right. All of you come on up. Ifs in three Sundays, by
the paper date. Soon as it gets dark."
"Calkins' friends, them people you read about in the paper?"
"Probably."
"That astronaut guy gonna be there?"
"I guess so."
"Motherfucker," Nightmare said. "You know, Baby don't put no
clothes on. I mean he's funny and he just refuses, flat out, you know?
And Dragon Lidy ain't gonna come if he don't."
"He can come. If he wants to come buck naked, that's all right
withme.n
"Yeah?"
"You guys come anyway you want. Bring your lights. That's all
they probably care about."
"I don't got nothing to dress up in," Nightmare said. "This ain't a
party you have to dress up for?"
"I'm coming like this."
"You know I'm gonna tell Baby you said to come on up to that
party buck naked." Nightmare frowned. "He probably gonna do it,
too. Cause he's a real funny motherfucker. I mean he walks around in
the street like that, all the God-damn time." The frown broke before
laughter. "I gotta see that. Yeah, I galla go see that shit."
"Three Sundays," Kid said.
"Maybe we all come over here first?" Nightmare offered.
"Okay. I'll see you then, if I don't before."
From the nail hung the framed photograph with the broken Cover
glass. Father, Mother, the two brothers and the sister gazed reprovingly in their dated dress. With black marker, on the glass, someone had
drawn, across the boy:' and the woman's mouth, outsized mustaches.
"Hey, there, pops!" Nightmare saluted the bearded gentleman in
the photo. "Kid, I'm gonna split. Thanks for the invitation. I'll lell the
Lidy. We're all waiting to hear about your next run.'
Nightmare opened the door.
Their shadows spilled the steps into night.
"So long." Nightmare trampled his own down to the sidewalk,
waved, and stalked away.
Kid looked back down the hall. All three light bulbs were working,
as well as the one in the bathroom. 1 guess, he thought, 1 picked a
good nest. The films of his thought hanging beyond words curled
546 DhalgrelL
and withered, made all the motions of the thinnest tissue caught in
blasting flame. I guess ...
Spitt stepped out of the living room. "We gonna eat out back, hty;
Nightmare still here?" His hand, straying on his chest, concentrated
its motions around the scar.
"Nope.-
nOh,'"
Behind Kid, the closing door clicked.
"He could'a stayed," Spitt said. 'We got plenty of food for
tonight-"
Kid wandered down the hall.
I am a parasite. I have never made a home. Even here, I have not
instructed a home to be made. In my whole stay, though I cannOt
recan lookmg for food, among these twenty, twenty-five faces,
some among them must take that care. I crawl from place to place,
watching homes or crumbling around me.
He wondered what kind of party Calkins expected.
Breath blicked from his nose; that was taughter.
On the service porch, Kid looked down into the yard (fire light On
the ceiling beams), grabbed the sill of the window, reared back, vaulted: "Whooop-peee!"
Others laughed.
"Jesus Christ," Raven said. "You'll break your fuckin' neck!"
Kid staggered, agOnized.
Three hands came to steady him.
And three VOices:
"Man, that must be fifteen feet!"
"It ain't fifteen feet-ten? Twelve? Here, Kid, have a drink. You
know there's a God-damn liquor store just around the Corner and
ain't nobody even broken in the window?"
"Its broken now. Shit. We're gonna have to work a week to drink
up alllhat booze.'
Kid took another step, grinning, between the scorpions who
flanked him. Pain shot again from caU to thigh. Did I break my knee,
he thought. No. It'll be all right in a minute ...
'You all right, Kid?" That was one of the black girls with bare
breasts joggling jingling links. "Man, you scared me good when you
come leaping out like that!·
Kid took another breath and grinned. "I'm okay." He leaned on
the black shoulder, while she pulled away from another gill to supPalimpsest 547 pon him. She laughed, shifted, steadied; and Kid pulled away, took another step, another breath. "Yeah, I'm okay. What we got to eat?" The Ripper, with a can opener, kneeled Over a big, odd-shaped can. "One of them canned hams." The tin wept gelatin down its red and blue label "We found three of thorn.' The fire crackled on the bottom of a ketlle hung on a pipe propped on cinder blocks. "The gas isn't working in the stove?" "Yeah," Denny said, across the fire, "but we thought wt'd cook aut. n The first bubble on the ... soup? stew? grey at the kettle edge, shook its reflection of the porch window frame, and burst. Another bubble grew. Kid took his weight off his throbbing leg. Better. He flexed, feeling the tender machinery of knee and ankle jarred from place. It was his booted leg. Perhaps the soft sole had hit a rock? "Don't throw your God-damn bottle in the yard, man. Don't you know about pollution? We gotta live here." "You shut up, or I'll pollute you!" a short-haired white woman said. "Throw your fuckin' bottle·over in the ,,/:Xt yard, will you?" 'Okay, okay . . . " Light snarled in the loops of chain, laid out dull splashes on dark leather, lit the trough beneath a black lip, put wires of light in greasy brass hair, glistened On the puffed rim of a lashless eye, sank in ,the graphite nap bushing an ovoid skull. The Ripper laughed and bent and wiped at his mouth with his wrist. The orchid, from the chain at his neck, spun bright petals. "Here ... !" A bottle neck hit Kid's mouth, clicked his teeth, hurt- inghis gum. 'Christ, man!" Kid beat it away. "I don't want no God-damn wine," which was the taste he licked from his lower lip; he rubbed his mouth. "Somebody get me something real" "You want this?" Denny asked. ·Yeah. What is it?" Kid drank, and cleared his burning throat. "You know when I was your age I use to be a fuekin' booze hound? I don't even like the stuff now." He took another, smaller drink, and handed the bottle back to Denny; "But I was a fuekin' hound." Guys argued: "Now what you gonna do with that?" 'Cut it up, cook it over the fire.'
.
-------. - -......--------------------
548 Dhalgren
"You can eat it right out of the can like that."
"Hell, no. That's ham, man. You'll get trichinosis! "
qMan! you can1 t get trichinosis from no canned ham! n
"Well, you're gonna cook mine before 1 eat any."
Somebody passed out long-handled kitchen forks. ("That's all
right. 1 got my huntin' knife.") Bubbling soup dribbled the kettle's
side. Kid's leg felt about okay. He turned, smiling at the dark, as scorpions joggled him to get at the meat. ("Hey, somebody start opening
up the other one, will you?") Soup hissed and chattered in the \lame.
The edges of the evening softened with the liquor. He looked for
Denny and Dennys bottle.
"Hey, Kid," The smile was a pit of flickering rot and silver. "You
real[y doing nice here, huh? Beautiful, yeah. Beautiful."
"Well, I'll be a motherfucker!" Kid announced, "I didn't even
think you were gonna live another twenty-four hours, much less
show up here." .
Pepper gaped wider. "Sort of ... hungryl" His chin jutted on the
syllable. He joggled a wine bottle in his spiky hand. "You got a really
nice nest here; and I'm all ready for a run."
"Help yourseU," Kid gestured over the heads around him. ·You
just go right on and help yourseU."
A very blond and square-jawed scorpion pushed from the center of
a bunch of blacks (Raven, Jack the Ripper, Thruppence, D-t, Spider)
stepped up behind Pepper, and said, "Jesus Christ ... Shit'" He
seized Pepper's scrawny shoulder. "What are you doing back here.
you sad-assed motherfucker? Why don't you get your ass out of here
before 1-"
"Hey, noW ... " Pepper said. "Hey ... '"
Others, looking, moved aside. The short-haired woman stepped
forward: Copperhead stopped her with a freckled hand on her
chained and vested shoulder.
"Come on and get the fuck out ·of here," the square-jawed blond
said. "Nobody wants you around stinking up the place now. You been
run out ,twice. Somebody gotla run you out again?"
"Man, I'm hungryl" Pepper complained. "Kid said 1 could-" And
under the thrusting hand, stumbled into Kid.
Kid stepped back, thought, no, with no word on top of it. He
swung his hand, and caught the back of the blond head so hard his
palm stung.
"Owe •... '" came unaccountably from Pepper, who scurried to
the side.
Palimpsest 549
The scorpion Kid had hit turned, his face screwed up.
No, Kid thought, this time with the word. 1 got a bum leg, I'm half
drunk, and I'm beating on people? No. This is going to get me in
trouble. "l.eave him alone!" Kid said loudly.
Scorpions shuffled in the silence.
Kneeling over the ham, Priest squinted. He was so close to the fire
his dark shoulders sweated.
Kid walked toward the scowling blond and took his shoulder.
"Now you just go on and get yourseU something to eatl" He shook
the scorpion's shoulder in large motions. "There's enough for everybody, see?" Am 1 really getting away with this? Kid began to laugh.
"Come on, give him a piece of ham." He pushed the scorpion toward
the fire. And I'll just tum, walk away, and wait for a fork in my
shoulder.
Kid turned.
Copperhead stood before the others, arms crossed, Glass 10 one
side of him, Spitt to the other. The short-haired woman, shaking her
head, was walking away.
Kid moved toward them thinking; 1 can't tell whether they're
about to back me or jump me. Do the others know? "Whyn't you get
yourseU something to eat, too?" He walked by.
Some tension had broken with his laughter.
Thruppence said, got a ladle or a cup or something?"
Jack the Ripper said, "We got bowls and cups and things. Somebody washed all the fuckin' dishes."
HaU a dozen crouched together behind the fire, shoulders smooth
as great plums, hair wrinkled as prunes, holding forks over the coals,
shifting hands suddeuly sucking their knuckles.
He looked at a bottle.
"You want some Of_?fI
·Yeah." He took the bottle and another drink, "Thanks,' and kept
Circling. Two were necking under a tree. Momentarily he thought
they were both boys.
Dollar lifted his race Cram the black girls disarrayed hair. "Hey,
Kid .. ." He blink.d in the firelight, his stubbly jaw blebbed here and
there.
Kid stepped over Dollars boots.
"You got something to eat yet?" Dennyasked.
Kid shook his head.
"You take this. I'll get another one."
The cup was hot and soup had run down the sides. "Thanks."
550 Dhalgren
·You won't get trichinosis from that ham if it isn't cooked
through, will you?" Denny asked.
"If it comes out of a can," Kid said, "it's cooked. n
"That's what I thought,' Denny said.
He sipped, stinging the roof of his mouth. The sensation took
seconds to subside to simple heat. He was looking, desultorily; for either
Pepper or the scorpion who'd harassed him. He could spot neither
around the fire. And people were going in and out of the house
again.
Glass, Spitl, and CDpperhead, less formally posed, but still together,
stood to' the side of the yard eating ham and soup. Kid doffed his cup.
·Can you hear that?" Glass asked.
UHear what? Ii
UListen,:n Spitt said.
Kid bent over the soup while it steamed his chin. The yard was
filled with voices. "Wbat?"
"There,' Spitt said.
Perhaps two blocks away; a man screamed. The sound went on
and on, died at the length of a long breath, and began again, this time
shaking and breaking.
"You wanna go check it out?" Copperhead took another bite of
ham. A line of grease glistened from the corner of his mouth into his
beard.
"Naw," Kid said.
the big hero, man," Copperhead said. UDan't you wanna
go help a gentleman in distress?" Copperhead laughed.
"No, I .. ,0
The man screamed again.
Momentarily Kid pictured the four of them foraging beyond the
firelight, through darkened streets, the ululation filling the night
about ,them.
"No, I don't wanna. r got Pepper fed. That's my heroics for the
night." He sipped loudly and wafked back among the scorpions
around the fire. When the neighbors are shrieking ... went through
his mind but ,could not :remember who'd said it.
"Here, Kid. You wanna use my fork?"
It was the blond scorpion who had tried to eject Pepper.
"Thanks." It was a long-handled, three-pronged laundry fork. Kid
took a chunk of ham and squatted beside the fire. He squinted before
flame. Trying to drink his soup, he spilled more over his hand. And
Palimpsest 551
even with the long fork, his knuckles were painfully hot. The blond
scorpion, squatting beside Kid, watched the meat bubble and char.
"Thanks for the fork," Kid said again after a few minutes and Sipped
from the cup once more.
The screaming had stopped.
Or there was too much noise to hear.
"Hey; Taklo
"Kid?"
"What are you doing?"
4
"What are you doing? Can you get down from there? You better
watch out ... "
Kid let go of the beam and crabbed down the rubble, raising dust
banks behind and an avalanche before.
"That was iropressive," Tak said. "You're still going around with
one shoe? You must have a sole on that foot like an oak board.'
"Naw." Kid beat his foot against his black jeans, both legs grey to
the knee. "Notreally."
"You exploring in there?" Tak pushed up his cap to watch the
smoke curl back through the girders. "How come you don't have the
rest of the nest? I didn't think scorpions ever traveled alone."
"I come," Kid shrugged. "I go. 1 take ,them on runs. Where you
going?"
"I'm on a mission of men:y for your girl friend."
"Lanya?"
"I volunteered to help her with her dress for your party."
Kid tried to hold back his laughter. It burst his lips' seal and lights
shot either in his eyes or in the windows of the warehouse across
from them.
"What's so funny?"
·She's got you turned into a seamstress?"
"She does not. Come on and I'll show you something interesting."
They walked the littered streets.
"You're going ,to come to the aren't yoU?H
"Not," Tak said, "on your fucking life.'
"Huh? Oh, man, come on. Catkins wants me to bring my friends.
I'm going to take the whole nest along. Don't you want to see what
happens when all \1S freaks get turned loose in there?"
552 Dhalgren
"Not terribly. But I suspect Calkins does-though I've never met
theman.1I
.. Aw, come onl Tak ......... n
"No. Somebody. got to be ar01md to read about it in the next day.
gossip column. That. my job. You just have a good time and drink a
glass of brandy for me. Swipe a botde if they've got any good stuff
and bring it back. I'm down to Gold Leaf. Somebody got into my
liquor connection and made off with just about everything worth
drinking."
"We got a liquor store right around our corner. What do you
drink? got everything. Anything you want. You just tell me, and
I'll get it for you."
"Five Star Courvoisier.· Tak laughed his whisky growl and hooked
his cap down. 'Come on." As they left the corner, he asked, "How
long you been up?'
"A few hours."
"Oh,' Tak said. "Because I got up very early. when it was still getting light. I came over heFt, and you could see flames ... ' He nodded
down the side street where turbulent smoke blocked vision less than
two blocks away.
'You could?"
"Now it's just ... " Tak nodded again.
Smoke bellied and heaved about the upper stories. The sky was
thick as cheese and eveninged without shadows. I don't (Kid
thought) get thirsty any more, but I'm always hoarse. Three boots
and one foot ground the gritty street.
"Tak, where's the monastery from here? I don't mean Reverend
Amy. chutCh. I mean the monastery."
"Now this is ... " Tak stopped. "This goes up' into the city and
turns into.Broadway. You just go straight on to the other end of
Broadway and you run right into it."
"Yeah? ... Just like that?"
"It's a long walk. I don't know if that bus is still running. Over
here." Tak stepped into the street.
The freight ramp sloped to a wooden door studded with rivet
heads the size of fifty-cent pieces. Above, on rust-ringed iron, aluminum letters, forward on bolts, announced cleanly: MSE WAREHOUSB
SPACE. By the door a black plaque reflected Kid's face askew. White letters obscured his eyes and lips: Maitland Systems Engineering Warehouse. Kid struggled momentarily with a memory of Arthur Richards
Palimpsest 553
while Tak took the hasp in both hands, grunted. The door rumbled
back from blank blackness. Tak looked at his hands, their cleanness
emphasized by swipes of rusty grease .
"Go on in.' Tak held his hands from his hips to keep them from
his pants.
Kid stepped in and heard his breath's timbre change. Iron steps
rose to a concrete porch.
"Go on up.n
Kid did and stepped sideways through the door at their head.
The skylight, three stories above, mapped continents in dirt and
light, among longitudinal and latitudinal tessellations.
"What's in_II the reverberation balted him-"what's in here? n
"Go on," and Tak was without face. He passed ahead of Kid. Each
boot heel on the concrete cast back stuttering echoes.
It was very cool.
Blocked by eight-foot plank X's, spools big enough for underground
electrical cables sat about the floor among twenty- and thirty-foot
stacks of cartons. Kid passed two before he recognized what was
wound on them.
Later he trie.d ,(Q figare out what the process of recognition had
been. At ,the moment of seeing there was a period in which all emotions were dead, during which he had gone up toone-yes, he had
put out his hand, pulled it back, and just stood there a long while.
In hanks, in dripping loops from the drum (hundreds of feet?
Hundreds of thousands? And how many drums were there in the
block-square warehouse?) the brass chain, set with prisms, ntlnors,
lenses, looped.
He stood before the ranked glitter, waiting for it to strike up some
explanatory thought.
The end of the chain hung to the floor, where a few feet formed a
full (c. 300 stars?) Pleiades.
There was an open cardboard carton beside the spool. Kid bent
down, pushed back the flap. They looked like copper beetles. He
pushed his hand into the metal tabs, picked out one-there was a
hole at one end-and tried to read what was embossed on it. The
light was too dim, and the corners of his eyes were stinging.
On the caTton, however, stenciled in white, was: PRODUCTO DO
BRAZIL.
Kid stood.
Tak had wandered some forty feet down an avenue of cartons.
554 Dhalgren
Kid's eyes had cleared to the dim light enough to make out the
stenciling on the boxes piled around him.
FABRIQUE FRANc;:AISE.
MADE IN JAPAN-the initial smudge must have been an 'M.'
TIPArMATAEAAENlKAI. •
Kid turned back to the chain. He had begun his observations in
curiosity. but what generated had so little to do with answers that
even curiosity blanked.
"Tak1 n
"What? Hey, come OVer here. You seen these?"
Kid sprinted up the aisle between the piled cartons.
Tak kicked back a board cover. Nails squeaked, and the echo
rolled among pyramided crates. ",his is where you come to get 'em if
you need any more. n
The holders inside the slats reminded Kid of the square cardboards
on which eggs were racked.
Some dozen had been removed.
The ones remaining, the size of golf balls and the color of gun
metal, were blistered with lenses. The switch-pips aU pointed to ,the
left side ·of the crate. To the right were the metal loops to link them.
Kid picked up his own projector, watched it swing on its chain.
"They don't have any batteries inside them,' Tak said. "You have
to get those from stores in the city."
Stenciled across the inside oUhe crate top it said, "SPIDER."
On the crates pHed around, Kid read:
DRAGON
LIZARD
FROG
BIRD OF PARADISE
SCORPION
MANTIS
MANTICORE
GRIFFIN
Kid lifted the corner of the holder. The layer beneath Was full.
"There must be-" he frowned at Tak-"thousands ofthem here ... ?"
"I gOtta get some stuff from upstairs," Tak said. "Come on."
"Tak. " He looked at the myriad crates labyrinthed around. "There
must be thousands of these things here! Millions, maybe!"
Dust filled a slant column from the skylights marbled panes.
Tak went to the metal steps against the wall. "There's a whole lot
Palimpsest 555
of weird stuff in here.' He leaned over the banister, grinned at Kid,
and started up.
"Hey." Kid swung around the metal newel and followed him.
"What did you come here to get?"
"Its upstairs. n
The cardboard cartons piled by the wall were water stained.
Plumbing rose beside them; the asbestos covering the pipes was
mottled too.
"Here you go. n
They walked down the balcony. Kid ran his hand along the rail,
looking out across the warehouse.
"This place always reminds me of the last scene in Citizen Kane,"
Tak said. "This is what I want."
Two bolts of ... cloth (it was some sort of lame. Kid couldn't tell,
in this light, whether it was gold or silver) leaned against the ·wall.
"For the dress?" Kid asked.
"She was talking about it, and I told her I remembered seeing
some stuff lying around.' He picked up the bolt and unwrapped it. "\
don't know if this is what she wants. It's pretty specia\. Go on and explore, if you want. I'll give a yell when I'm leaving.'
Kid walked a dozen steps further, glanced back-Tak was still
stretching out yards of cloth-then walked on.
The cartons near him-smaller and piled haphazardly-were
stenciled with clumsy representations of zodiacal signs. He stepped
around them, Another, opened like the box of tags downstairS, had
been left in the middle of the plated walkway.
His own steps, even his bare foot, set off a metallic ring. The open
top joggled with the shaking of the floor.
Diagonally across the cardboard was stenciled:
RED EYE-CAPS
He did not frown. An the muscles ·of his face urged him toward the
expression. But something else was paralyzed. He squatted, pushed
back the top.
They had probably a.Jl been stacked neatly together once. But
movement had jumbled most of them. He picked up one. It was like
a concave disk the size of a quarter, cut from a pingpong ball.
It was red.
He turned it in horny fingers. But it doesn't explain it, he thought.
556 Dhalgren
Then blinked, because his eyes were filled with water. It doesn't!
Gooseflesh settled over his shoulders, his back, his buttocks, like
gauze. What could anybody want with ...
He blinked again.
The tear feU on the cap's mat.te surface. Where it spread, the <:olor
deepened to the luster of scarlet glass.
No: That was a double thought, with and without word, and hardly
an overlap.
The cap cracked in his fmgers.
He dropped it in the box, stood in a motion. He let out all his
breath, took in some more, and swallowed in surprise at the echo.
He stepped back.
When do they put them on? When do they take them off? Where
do they put them ... I would rather think (the thought kaleidoscoped and went lucid) that these have nothing to do, nothing to do
with ...
Kid stepped back again, turned, hurried up the balcony.
Tak, the lame folded over his arm, squatted by another box. "I got
everything I need. Find anything interesting?"
From where Kid stood, looking down, the visor masked the engineer's eyes.
The terrible thing, Kid realized, is that I'm too scared to ask!
"Hey; are you all right?" Tak raised his head. The shadow bobbed
on the top half of his face. "You're not going to go into another one of
your flip-outs, are you?"
Kid tried to say; I'm all right. All he did was expel a';other breath.
From the carton Tak removed some square piece of metallic
equipment and stood. "Let's go." He Sighed.
Halfway down the stairs Kid managed ,to say, "I'm all right." It
hung detached in dusty light, blunted by echoes. Tak gave him a sarcastic glance.
Is this, Kid thought, one of the things that, a minute hence, will
slip from the register of memory to take SOme inaccessible address
beside my name? (He closed his mouth, and the roar he had moved
through for the last minutes ceased.) More likely it is one of those
Ihings that 1 will never be able to speak of, and never forgel.
They were halfway to the door before the first voice proportioned
with amusement yawned somewhere and inquired, Never] then giggled, turned over, and went to sleep.
Well not for a hell of a long time.
Palimpsest 557
But he felt a little bit better.
"Did you see those?" Tak nodded down another aisle of crates.
"What?" Kid's beart still beat very fast. He felt light-headed.
'Come on." Tak led him along.
The orchids hung on wooden racks pegged over with dowels.
Kid to one stand. "This is ... the fancy kind." He looked
back. "Like you have, isn't it?"
"Plain ones are over tltere." Tak stepped beside him. "I really
thought you'd probably been in here before.·
To Kid's questioning glance, Tak took down the nearest. Beneath it
was lettered:
BRASS ORCHIDS
Kid laughed. It made a weak sound in his throat, but echo lent it
body. "Here, let me see that?" Kid took the scrolled contrivance and
turned it around and around. "I guess it would be okay if 1 took this
one . .. wouldn't it?"
Tak shrugged. "Why not?"
Kid folded his fmgers together and pushed tltem through the wrist
band. "I left my other one back at the nest. Might as well have twoone for special occasions.' He made a sudden feint at Tak. ·You like
that?" He laughed again.
"Come on.· Tak had not moved at all. "Let's go.·
They were in Sight of the door when Kid got another attack of
gooseflesh. But this one just made him grin. He looked up at the skylight, hunched his shoulders, and hurried after Tak. I'll probably never
be able to find this place again, he thought. To steal a souvenir (he
looked down at the yellow blades about his hand) seemed suddenly
the ultimate cunning.
Outside, Tak smoothed the folded material across his arm. "Since
this is going to be your girl friend's ball gown, 1 shouldn't show you
how it works. But it's sort of neat. Just a second.· He took out of his
pocket the piece of equipmeDt-a metal box the size of a cigarette
pack witlt three dials, two knobs, and a small light on one corner.
"Give me a loan of the battery in your shield. •
"Oh, sure." Kid fumbled the sphere through the blades. The projector clicked open. "I only got one hand. You take it out.·
"Right."
Tak opened the back of the box and put the battery in.
558 Dhalgrert
"Nowwatch.n
He turned a knob.
The light on the box's Corner flickered argon-orange.
"Here we go."
He turned another.
The cloth over Tak's arm-at first Kid thought Tak was shaking
it-turned purple.
"Huh?" Kid saia.
The metallic scales from which the cloth was made all seemed te)
have reversed. Some reversed again, and a blot of scarlet grew in one
corner, occluded the purple, till it in turn was swept by glittering
green.
"Oh, hey ... !" Kid stepped back. "That's going to be a dress?"
"Pretty, isnJt it?"
The parti-colored flicker, like insect wings, resolved to blue: that
deepened,and deepened more, to black.
Tak turned 00' the box. Most of the cloth fell into dull silver. He
shook it; and it was all one metallic grey.
'You know how it works?"
"Um-hm." Tak put the box back in his pocket. "It's simple, really.
Hey, don't tellianya I showed you this. She wanted it to be a surprise,'
'Oh, sure," Kid said. ·Sure." He looked back at the warehouse.
"Hey; Tak, who. 0 , ' ?"
"Now that question,' Tak said at his sh6ulder, "if I knew the anSwer to, I would have already told you."
'Oh," and Kid began to list those to which that could have been
an adequate response.
'You want to come up and have a drink?"
Kid said, "Hey, let me see how that stuff works again. That's what I
want to see. n
Tak Sighed. ·Sure.·
" ... gonna kill you, motherfucker!" shrieking like a baby in pain.
Kid leaped from the loft, pivoted around the door jamb. Dollat
danced in the hall, swinging the plank above his head.
"Hey ... !" Copperhead stepped back, his arm before his face.
• -kill you if you don't leave me alone!"
Copperhead ducked. The plank hit the wall.
Three scorpions (two black, one white) crowded the living room
Palimpsest 559
doorway. Two (one man, one woman) stepped in, staring, from the
service porch.
Dollar's head went back.
Kid lunged and grabbed; his hand tangled Dollars hair. He grasped
the scorpion's shoulder and spun him back against the wall. Dollar
crashed, and clicked his long teeth. The plank corner hit Kid's shoulder and clattered to the floor, while Dollar opened his mouth again.
His lips strung out gummy saliva. Dollar tried to shove forward,
gasping; Copperhead was ,trying to pull Kid away.
Kid jammed his elbow back. "Get off!"
"I'm gonna kill'im!" Dollar shrieked in Kid's face. "He won't leave
me alone. I'm gonna kill 'im! He knows I'm gonna kill 'im! I'm gonna
kill 'im! I'm gonna kill-"
Kid flung himself against Dollar, spread-eagled them both on the
wall. Then his shoulder, still stinging from the plank, exploded in
pain, so surprising he couldn't cry out. He just grunted and clawed at
Dollar's head. Dollars teeth came open with a rush of air. He heard
Dollar's skull hit the wall twice, and realized he was pounding it. He
felt blood dribbling his arm. Dollar's eyes were unfocused. He was
trying to shake his head. His upper teeth were filmed with blood, his
• lower lip flecked with it.
"You gonna let me take care of him?" Copperhead's voice Came
out a fifth too low; his words wobbled. "This fuckin' loony is gonna
hurt somebody! And then there ain't gonna be no telling. You gonna
let us take care of him?"
Kid looked back. Copperheads bearded chin was buried back in his
neck. His freckled fISts opened and closed, and he swayed and panted.
"You gonna let us take care of him?"
Dollar rocked his head over the wall. "You tell him to leave me
alone!" Tears made the lashes of his left eye glisten. "I'm gonna kill
'im! He knows it!" Dollar blinked. Tears rolled into the stubble that
grew high up his pustuled cheek.
In ,the stillness, Kid's partie died. What surged in its place was rage.
But he could find no words to bellow. He raised his hands and let a
roaring breath. '
Copperhead bliuked and stepped back.
Dollars eyes stopped rolling.
Kid felt some mUscle leaping in his jaw and flexed his mouth to
control it. He rubbed his sticky shoulder.
Glass stood in the bathroom door, Spitt, a few steps beltind him.
560 Dhalgrm
In the open front door, Denny had one hand on the knob and the
other on the molding.
Waiting for words to come to lrim, Kid heard talking.
" ... You see that? You see that, the way he did? ... " Pepper,
crowded in the living room door, whispered intently at D-t, who
wasn't listening. " ... You see the way Dollar went after that nigger,
with a damn board? I bet he would've really messed him up, I bet. He
better watch out for Copperhead, now, 'cause Copperhead gonna get
him. You think he could beat up Copperhead? Huh? If Kid ain't come
in to stop it, who do you bet would've got the other one first, huh? If
Kid ain1 t come in ... "
Between thin shoulders, heavy chain, Pepper's face bore
ecstatic, rotted grin.
"You wait, Copperhead,· Kid said, "till I tell you to.'
Copperhead closed his lips and, more just to move his head than
to agree, nodded.
"Go on,' Kid said. "JUSt don't bother with him."
" ... Yeah," Copperhead said. His fists opened, " ... only 'cause
that's what you sayin' ... ' He turned and walked np the hall; Glass
and Spitt shifted weight.
"I'm gonna kill Jim! He knows I'm gonna_"
Copperhead turned and barreled back.
Kid hit Dollar on the side of his face with both fists meshed. It was
a weak and awkward blow (and his shoulder stung and throbbed beneath the sting) but Dollar crumpled witn his hands over his ears.
Copperhead grabbecLKid's shoulders (the pain in the left one went
up another level) and got two kicks in around Kid's legs:
"Owe ... ! Naw ... In
Kid shoved Copperhead back. "Someone get him out ofhere!"
No one moved.
'You two I Get this bastard out of this God-damn nest before
somebody kills him!' He turned and put both hands on Copperhead's chest. Copperhead's vest hung down one arm. A chain had
faHen over the other. "You leave him alone .•. otherwise I'm gonna
have to bust you too, and then we'll both get hurt!"
Behind him there was a scraping and jangling.
He looked over his shoulder. Denny and another scorpion (neither
were the two he had yelled at) supported Dollar, who panted,
lurched, and couldn't get his feet under him at all. Kid thought: He
must be faking. Damn it, nobody hit him that hard.
Palimpsest 561
Copperhead took another breath, swallowed, shook his head, took
another.
" ... Dollar would have really busted up Copperhead if Kid didn't
stop him, I bet? You think he would've killed him? I bet he wonld've,
r mean you see the way he went after Copperhead with that board?
Then Kid just runnin' in like that ... "
The front door opened; Dollar's feet struggled with the steps.
Kid breathed hard, clapped Copperhead's shoulder and walked
past. He tried to atomize the of the action. He felt terribly
clear-headed. But for all his clarity. he could trace no motivations
through the memories of blows and pain.
He stood on the service porch kneading his shoulder, listening to
people moving again in other rooms.
"Kid ... 1"
The black girl Dollar had been necking with last night (from her
clothes, Kid saw, she wasn't a scorpion) tncked under one arm, Copperhead, still breathing hard, stepped onto the porch. Spitt and Glass
were wedged behind him.
"What?" Kid squeezed his shoulder again. "What do you want?"
The scrape from the plank had done more harm than Dollar's bite.
Rabies, he thought; I'm gonna get rabies from the bastard.
"You let us go out and take care of him, okay? He's hanging
around the honse. He's just gonna ,try and make trouble. We work
him over, and he'll be all quiet a.nd nice again, once he better. I
don't know what you're trying to do," Copperhead said. "But it won't
work no other way."
Ul don't care," Kid said, mainly because his shoulder hurt, "what
you do with him as long as you do it outside."
Copperhead looked back at the other two scorpions. 'Okay," he
said thickly. 'Come on."
The black girl stood in the doorway alone, fingering the waist of
her maroon jeans. "They shouldn't do that," she said, with an aCCent
out of Florida and an expression of concern.
As clear as he had felt moments back, Kid felt that dull now.
Mouth opened, he nodded at her.
Later he stalked through the hause, ignoring the people who
moved around him. He stood at the front door, then suddenly turned
and went to the porch, and stood before the door ,there, nat really
looking at the yard when he became aware of it, h. went into
the kitchen.
562 Dhalgrett
Outside the screening a girl was asking: " ... inside? Do you know
if he's in there? The big ... "
Kid opened the door.
Her knuckle leaped to her chin. Her blonde hair, caught ill a barrette with plastic flowers, slipped off her shoulder as she turned her
head.
"You're about eight blocks off Jackson, " Kid said.
June shook her head. "r wasn'dooking for . . . '
Raven (one of the scorpions who owned the Harley) rubbed his
dirty hands on his vest, squeezed his long, rough hair together, took
the thong from between his teeth, and tied a top-knot large as his
head. "r don't know what she wants.»
"You ... you live here?" June asked.
Kid nodded. "What do you want? If you're not looking for George,
who are you looking for?' •
Her hand fell from button to button on her blouse. "My brother."
Kid frowned,
"My big brother, Edward."
"Oh ... " Kid frowned harder. "What makes you think you'll find
himhere?11
"Somebody saw ... said they saw ... you just ... " She looked at
Raven,
He had settled his thumb in his belt and stared back.
Kid beckoned her inside with a nod. She came sideways through
the door. Because the siRk had fiRed up once more, somebody had
put the kettle, sides streaked with hardened soup, ill the middle of
the floor.
June looked at it.
Kid tried to remember how long he'd been stepping around it.
"Somebody told my mother that they'd ... they thought they'd
seen somebody who ... "
They went into the next rOom.
"My parents don't know I came," she said. "They wouldn't have
wanted me to ... come here. n
Two black girls turned to watch her. A blond boy came up behind
them, leaned on their shoulders, sucked in his lower lip and drawled.
'Shit ... » The three laughed.
"He isn't one of them?" Kid asked. "Is he?"
She looked at the toes of her black shoes; spots of Ted spread her
cheek.
Palimpsest 563
°You want to hunt around?"
She nodded and hurried ahead to interpose him between the leering
SCOrpIOns and heISeIf. Two more passing the doorway, the short-haired
white woman (with a tattoo on her arm) and D-t, caught her eyes, till
she suddenly jerked her head away and closed her mouth.
"Come on, I'll show you around. n
In the hallway the girl in maroon Levi's was talking to Siam. June
looked at the photograph with its cracked glass at the same time
Siam and the girl looked at her.
its because, he realized, she stands so far away from. me, so nervously, that makes them stare like that. She circles she still circles
she circles in. Yet shes so far away! It's not even realization wen;
on) that she's a pretty girl, but rather that there are over two dozen
people living in here and the isolation she demands about her destroys
our concept of human space. That their hostility comes out in sexual
leers and sexual jibes ("You see that pussy walk through here?" somebody, male or female, he wasn't sure, said in the next room. "Where's
my knife and fork?") is a generic response to something far more personal than her gender-though she may not understand that for years.
Some people are very young at seventeen.
"You don't live in the park any more?" June asked.
"Nope." He looked out on the porch and into the yard. "He's not
one of those?"
She shook her head without, he thought, looking.
"Maybe in here.' They crossed the hall; Kid opened the door.
It was hot and even Kid sometimes wondered how they slept in
charred half-dark. Four, a girl among them, naked on the big
mattress in the corner, sweated inertly, breaths hissing in different
rhythms. Cathedral with his back against the wall was reading a book
Whose cover had come off (-Brass Orchids: Kid recognized the title
page). In deference to the sleepers, he had not raised the shade. The
lion, crouched on the sill, read over his shoulder.
Kid stepped forward.
June, her hand loose before her face once more, followed.
The closet door had been taken down and propped up on boxes.
An open sleeping bag hung off it onto the floor. A boy and girl, both
with long hair, slept there together. Neither were scorpions and the
boy (his hand curled against her neck;) looked as though he would
have slept easier in the commune.
Someone (Angel?) rummaged inside the closet. Things rumbled
56'/ Dhalgnm
and fell and growled, punctuated by. ". . . shit ... " and ' ... God
damn ... " and " ... shit! ... " and " .•. shit ... "
Since Kid had last been in the room, someone had hung up a
poster of George as the Moon. Around it were a half dozen Playboy
centerfolds, twO covers from Black Garters, and lots of naked women
playing tennis at some nudist camp.
June closed her fists so tightly in the skirt of her green jumper,
they shook.
This is an act, Kid thought. But then, so is this.
"Eddy?" Her voice was firm for all her quivering arms.
"Huh? ... Oh, hey ..• " It was the square-jawed blond scorpion
who'd harassed Pepper. are you ..• just a second." He pushed
the blanket off his feel and began to lace his sneakers. He snapped
his jeans together and searched for his vest. Hair, light as his sister's,
made a crushed and sprung helmet of gold foil too big for his head.
"I've ... I've never seen anything like this in my life!" June accused,
softly. Her face looked as though, expecting milk, she had swallowed
orange juice. She actually said: "Eddy ... is it really you?"
"Just a second," the blond repeated, got his vest on, and stood, unsteadily on the mattress. He looked too old for Kid's picture of June's
older brother. His forehead was ,creased. His temples were high. Like
I'm a baby face, Kid thought, maybe you'd just think he was over
twenty-five: but there was a certain youthful unsurety of movement.
Like his sister'S. Their eyes and upper lips were identical. His lower
one was fuHer ,than hers-more like Mrs Richards'. He came toward
them. "What'd Yllu come here for?"
'We thought you'd gone to another city. Eddy!" She looked past
his shoulder and back. "Oh ... if Daddy and Mommy could see you'
here, in this, like this, they'd just ••. die ... they'd die ..• "
"What do you want?"
"To talk to you. To see you. To see if you were really ... Somebody
said they'd seen somebody who looked like-'
"Just a second," Eddy said. "I golta go to the-I mean IjUst woke
up." He touched his sister's shoulders, then stepped past Kid into the
hall. "I'll be right back ... '
California turned over on the mattress.
Cathedral looked up from the book.
June's eyes flicked about the shadowed room, caught once on the
poster, dodged it. "I liked your book very ..• I thought it was nice ..•
the part you wrote about us when ... you knOw." She said after a
moment: "Eddy lives here with you ... I mean how long has he ...•
Palimpsest 565
Kid shrugged.
"My mother likes your book too," she said after another moment.
"She gave it to a few of ... "
When she didn't finish, he said: "Say hello for me.·
"r wouldn't dare!" After a second, she closed her mouth. nOh, r
couldn't . .. "
It isn't worth getting angry, Kid thought. He leaned against the
doorway edge. Angel, in the closet, looked out, said, "What, .. ?" got
no answer, shrugged, and went back in. I don't answer because there
is nothing to say. She turns and stares fixedly at some pile of bedding
on the floor she does not really see, sure an answer is demanded of her.
He could walk away and leave her to wait alone.
"Watch it," Glass said behind him.
Kid turned.
"Got it." Spilt hefted Dollars ankles up under his arms.
"You just put him in there," Copperhead said. "He'll be all right.'
June had turned too. Kid was impressed how well, for her nervousness, she looked interested but not hysterical.
Dollars shoulder hit Ihe door.
"Back him up there, huh?· Glass lifted Dollar roughly by the arm,
stepped over, and walked him through.
" ... you see that? YOu see how they done him? He was just hanging around outside, he didn't even run or nothing, when they came
after him. Shit, they didn't do that much. Soon as Copperhead hit
him the third time he crumpled right up like that. He ain't even got a
bloody nose. His eye looks pretty bad, though ... '
Below the eye the puffy cheek was scraped. Dollar's arms flopped
out on either side. His belt was opened.
"I think he fakin'," Copperhead told Kid, scratching his head. "I
think he just didn'I want to get hit no more, and he's just fakin'. But
he's fakin' pretty good.'
"He didn't run when he saw you coming?" Kid asked.
"Where was he gonua run?" Copperhead held his right fist in his
left band. The freckled knuckles were bleeding. "Put him down on
that one. n
Kid looked, but couldn't see Glass's hands.
Angel came out of the closet again, looked around, said, .. Aw, Jesus
Christ ... " shook his head, and again went back inside.
By the window, Cathedral, who had closed his book, opened it
again.
"They put him on Eddy's ... ?" June began.
566 Dhalgren
The couple on the door shifted. The counterpoint of the naked
scorpions' snoring went on without change.
"Excuse me, huh?" With a glare Eddy stepped around Pepper. He
walked to his mattress, squatted, and pulled a hank of chains out
from under Dollar's shoulder. He looked lip at Kid. "They got him?"
He shook his head, picked up the blanket and pulled it up over Dollar's shoulders.
That, Kid thought, is for her. The room was too hot for blankets.
Putting on his chains, Eddy carne back to the door. "What did you
come here for?"
"I don't know ... I just don't know-l just don't understand how
you can . . . n
Spilt and Glass had gone. Copperhead looked at June, frowned at
Kid, and left.
"Corne on,' Kid said. "You people want to talk? Let's go out on the
porch, huh? People are sleeping here, right?"
Kid let them go first, and took lip Eddy's rear.
In the hall, the bathroom door was open; Filament-yes, that was
the short-haired white woman's name, he suddenly rememberedwas taking her morning crap, jeans around her shins, the Times folded across her knees.
"In there," Eddy pointed over June's shoulder.
June turned throligh the service porch door, and said, "Oh, I'm
sor __ tI
"Huh?" Raven's stream halted. "There's somebody using the bathroom," he explained, bewildered, to june's bewildered stare; and his
urine chattered in the sink again.
"Come on, come on," Kid herded them in. "He'll be finished in a
minute.tI
Raven shook himself, pushed himself back intO his pants. "Yeah,
I'm finished.'
This has been planned, Kid thought smugly. This cOlildn't just be
happening.
Raven left-
"I'll shoo. anybody else out," Kid said.
-then ducked back in the door. "Hey, I meant to run some water
in the sink, you know ... ?"
"Later,:II Kid said.
"Okay." He left again.
June was looking Olit the window. Eddy was watching her and
pulling the hair at the back of his neck. "What did YOli want, huh?"
Palimpsest 567
June turned.
"I figured," Eddy said, "you would all get out. I mean I thought
Mom and Daddy would take you and Bobby to another ... city ... "
"You didn't tell him," June asked, "about Bobby?"
"I didn't know he was your brother until three minutes ago," Kid
said. "june pushed Bobby down an elevator shaft and broke his neck,
aCCidentally. He's dead." And immediately George's face filled his
mind, obliterating all other reactions.
"Mother's very sick," june said. "She really isn't well at all. And
I'm worried about Daddy. He goes out to work every day, you know;
in spite of it all. But sometimes now he doesn't come home for three,
orfour days ... "
"Huh?" Eddy leaned back against the washing machine.
"What ... ?" which was not a reaction to what june was saying at all.
"I'm so worried I don't ... know what to do. I swear ... !"
Though her sentences were as halting as before, she spoke each fragment more firmly. "Since you've gone, it's all ... everything has just
faUen apart. Everything, Eddy. Since YOli went, it's like ... like the
plug was pulled out and everything ran out. All of it."
"Jesus Christ ... " Eddy looked at the floor and shook his head.
"Bobby ... ?"
She circles, Kid thought, she circles, magnificently banal, denying
guilt or innocence: if only in her single-mindedness, she is heroiC!
Biting both lips, june shook her head. "Are you going to come
home?tI
And, like an afterthought: She is only a seventeen-year-old, overprotected god. (Somewhere, George leered.)
"Well," Eddy said, "what for ... ?" Then he said, "Bobby's dead?
And Dad doesn't come there any more?"
'Some," she said. "Oh, he comes back ... "
Eddy looked up. "What would I come back for?"
"Oh, if you got some nice clothes, and a haircut and stuff, and told
them you were sorry . .. II
"Sorry for what! He said he was going to hill me if I carne back!"
"But that's just because---:n
"They start it," Eddie said. "They start it every time I go back there,
and 1 can't stop it 1 don't know how. why I went away ... "
"But if you said you were sorry for the way you acted-'
"Sorry for what? Yeah, I'm sorry that every time 1 go back there
they start needling me until I blow up and then they blow up right
back! I'm sorry Momma's sick, I'm sorry Dad's all upset. I'm sorry
568 Dhalgren
Bobby's dead." Eddy frowned, and after a second, he asked, "You
killed him ... ?"
June began to cry. silently, eyes streaming.
"Oh, hey, I'm ... look, I didn't mean ... " By his hips his hands
closed and opened and closed with the motion Kid recognized as the
one that had preceded Copperhead's fury.
"You could take us away . . . !" Her crying burst full. What Kid
thought she said through it was " ..• from this horrible place!' But
her sobs she was as di,fficult to understand as some Jackson
black. Finally she damped her mouth, rubbed her eyes, sniffed. "r
just wish someone would ... mke me away!"
"Why doesn't Dad go?"
"He doesn't think Mother will. And ... I don't eVen think h.
wants to."
"You mke them."
"I'm just a girl: June said. "I can't do anything. I can't do anything at alit" She rubbed her forehead on the heels of her hands.
Eddy's hands turned over on his knees. "They wouldn't go before?" Eddy said. "r couldn't make them go!"
June lifted her face from her palms. "What are you doing here?"
she demanded, softly. "Oh, Eddy, please come home! What are you
doing in a place like this? This is just. .• here ... awfu!!"
"What?"
"I mean: she said, "what do you do here?"
"Mm," Eddy shrugged, "we don't do too much. We all just live
heIe, the scorpions. You know? We're all together. Here. Thats all"
"You don't," she began tenrotively, "rob people on the street, and
beat up people and take their money, and things like that ... do
yoU?H
"Naw," Eddy said, indignant. "Naw, we don't do things like that.
Why do you think we do things like tbat?"
"Thaes what people say," June said. "Sometimes in the newspaper,
it says things like that."
"The newspaper says a lot of things that aren t true, you know? You
know that. Besides, now the Kid's a friend of the guy who runs the
paper, hes having a party for the Kid, and we're all going up there. So
the paper will probably do a little better by us, huh?"-this last to Kid.
Kid, by the door, with folded arms, shrugged.
"What do you do, then?"
"' don't know," Eddy said. "We make runs."
Palimpsest 569
"What's that?'
"You know ... " Eddy looked at Kid. "Kid is the boss here; he
takes us out on runs. n
"What do you do on a ... run?"
"The guys all get together and we ... go some place, check it out;
get stuff, stuff we want, stuff we'd like to have."
"Like food?"
"Not food! You don't make food runs if you're a scorpion, unless
things have really gotten up tight. You go for other things ... "
"Like what?T.I
"Stuff."
"And bring it back here?"
uIf it's something we want. H
"You don't look like you have very much here ... ?" June said.
"We doni t need much. n
"Then what do you do on these runs?"
"Well, we ... n Eddy shrugged.
"We break things," Kid said. "Mainly. And if there're people
around who don't like it, we rough them up."
"Is that what you do?" june asked Eddy.
·Sometimes. Yeah, sometimes we do that. But most of the places
we go, there isn't anybody there. The people you do find, they're so
scared they usually split." He looked as though he was trying to remember something. ·Oh, yeah. We keep things quiet if somebody has
a problem and comes to us. That doesn't happen too much. People
are scared of us. So they dou' t act up."
"That's what other people can our protection business," Kid explained. "Only we don't protect anybody."
"Yeah," Eddy attested.
"But why ... ?"
"We'd do something else," Kid said, "if there was something else
to 00-"
"-'Cause its ... " Eddy began. "Look, I'm a scorpion and I like
being a scorpion. It's better than anything else I've done. It's a tough,
dangerous world out there, and we gotta survive ... you know? People are scared of us, and maybe they shouldn't be. But it makes it easier. To survive. The reason I'm a scorpion is because when a bunch of
us walk down a street, and somebody Sees us, they think-" Eddy
snapped his fingers- "yeah. We come along and we get the first pick
of whatever is there; and if anybody tries to keep it from us, they better
570 Dhalgren
watch out. We're together, you see? For one another. If one scorpion
gets in trouble, then the nest comes down and swanns! If something
comes at the nest, then you'll have scorpions from all over. The guys
here don't care who you are, where you come from, or what YOll do;
they're for you .•• like a family. When you're a scorpion, you know
you're part of something thats important, that means something, that
makes people stop, and then think ... You know ... ?"
In the silence, June looked confused.
"Is that why you're a scorpion?" Kid stood in the doorway and
shook his head. "Shit ... Hey!"
Her eyes snapped at bim-
·You haven't found George yet?"
-and widened; her head vibrated, rather than shook in negation.
"Keep looking." Kid tried to smile, succeeded, and found the effort
honest. "You will."
Walking down the hall, Kid pondered the probability that Eddy
would leave with June. that would be pretty good. He looked in the
back room to check Dollar. He was in the same pOSition (as was
everyone else) breathing roughly and evenly.
In the loft room, Kid, with his bare toes, nudged Raven's knee.
Raven was sitting creisslegged before a pile of bolts and screws. "You
can go run the water in the sink now."
"Huh?" Raven looked up. ·Oh yeah, in a second."
Kid kicked the knee again with his boot toe. "Will you go wash
out the fuckin'sinkl"
"Okay, okay. It ain't gonna smdl no more in another minute-I"
"I'm not worried about the fuckin' smell. Just go on." Which was
true.
·Okay!" Raven got up and left the room.
In sudden fury at the brother aod sister, Kid wanted their talk interrupted and both of thent out.
He climbed up the notched beam into the loft. Denny, his feet up
on the wall, glanced from the Escher propped on his chest, then
turned another page. Kid sat with his back against the wall. "Hey?"
"What?"
"Have I taken you guys on any runs, yet?"
·You forgetting things again?"
·You tell me if I have or not and I'll tell you."
"Just that an •. "
"When?"
donlt remember?»
IlTell me, cocksuckerlll
Palimpsest 571
"When the ... sun came up, and you ran everybody over to that
house. Where Dollar killed Wally. That's the only run you made, so
far. I mean you didn't plan it out like a run or anything. But that's all."
uCh."
"You remember that?l'I
"I remember. I)
"Mmm." Denny nodded and went back to his book.
°1 guess I'm going to have to make another one soon."
°Mmm," Denny said again, but did not look up.
Why do we make runs? Kid thought: Because if we didn't, we'd be
a little more crazy than we are now.
Eddy passed the door.
"Hey, Eddy?"
Eddy stopped. "What?"
°Shegone?"
Eddy let out a breath. "Yeah."
"And you're gonna stay here?"
"Man," Eddy said, "I can't do anything for them. And she's . . .
Well-" .
"I know," Kid said. "Hey, Eddy ... don't make any more speeches.
You're a really bad press agent." -
"Huh?" Eddy stepped into the room. "Oh ... yeah. Uh . .. Kid?"
Kid heard bolts roll across the floor. "Yeah?"
"Well ... 'Eddy', see, thats what my sister and family call me. But
the guys around here, they all caU me Tarzan."
uTarzan?n It was a question, but with ,a Iowedng, not a rising,
flection.
"Yeah."
"Okay."
Eddy turned to leave.
"Hey, Tarzan?"
"What?2I
"Sorry about your family."
Eddy smiled, briefly and weakly. "Thanks." He left.
Raven carne in and said, "Aw, shit! Somebody kicked my fuckin'
SCrews all over the God-damn floor!" He sucked his teeth, squatted,
and, out of sight from the edge of the loft, began to roll them back
together.
572 Dhalgnm
I come. I go. Rather than going, though, I'll stay. This cage seems
too easy to flee. Is that what keeps us here? To leave the city: That is
the thought that makes me weak in the small of the back and watery
in the mind so much so ,that it is easier not to remember it once the
thought is Waiting for a word to push on these walls, with its
brass hiss, there is no way to begin. Adjusting the frame to accommodate the day, I am swollen with terror at my inability to distinguish,
at any action, what differentiates time after from time before.
"Hi, what are you putting together?" she asked.
"Just a piece of junk--" Raven said.
Denny clapped Escher closed, and rolled to lean over the edge.
"Hey! Lanya!'
"Hi, babes. Is Kid up there?"
"Yeah, he's right here."
"Room for me?" Then her head came over the loft's edge, and
frowned. ". . . This· one is harder to climb than the ladder On the
other
Kid pushed up to his knees to grab her shoulder. Denny was already at the edge to help.
"Hey, I think 1 can do it more easily myself. Let'S see ... " She
scrunched her features. "Urn . .. No,.please. I'll get it." She pushed
over the edge, almost slipping once. "There." She took a breath.
"Now altI have to worry about is getting down."
"You came down to see: us! n
"Sure,' she told Denny, who now put both hands on her knee. "I
told you I would, didn't 11" She took Kid's hand, and one of Denny'S.
"Tak told me you saw whats going to be my dress." She was wearing
jeans and a tan hlouse. 'Just as well if it isn't too much of a surprise.
Have you decided which shirt you're going 10 wear, Denny?"
"I thought," Denny said, "I could bring all three and sort of
change every once in a while."
"WhataFeyou wearing?"
"What I have on," Kid said.
Lanya thought a minute. "Wash the pants fIrst. Give them to me
and I'll run them through the machilJ.e. We have one that works in
the basement of our building.'
"I only have one pair,' Kid said.
Lallya laughed. let go of their hands, and crawled to the back of
thelled.
"I'll shave, though."
Palimpsest 573
"I thought you decided to grow a beard.'
Raven, from the floor, called up, "I got a razor if you want to use
it. Everybody else does."
"I probably already have," Kid said. "Thanks."
"I taught all morning and afternoon," Lanya said. "What did you
do?H
Denny shrugged. "Nothin'. We haven't been doin' too much of
anything. We don't ever do nothin' around here." Denny got his boot
out from under him and sat back very close to the edge. "Dollar tried
to break open Copperhead's skull with a plank, and Kid jumped in
and broke it up--"
"-little bastard-" Kid flexed his shoulder, which still hurt-
"tried to chew my arm off-"
"-and so we him out, but Copperhead and Glass and Spilt
went out and got hIm anyway. Hes inside, pretty beat up."
"We don't do too much here," Kid said. "Never guess who came to
visit. She left just before you got here."
"Who? °
"June Richards."
"What on earth for?"
"Her brothers here."
"I thought he fell down an elevator shaft and broke his neck."
Denny said, "Was that her brother?"
"Her other brother," Kid said. Then to Denny. "This brothers Ta!4an."
"Yeah, I was just here. Remember?"
"Oh.lI
"What did she want?"
"Family problems."
"I thought you'd had enough of that familys problems.'
"So did 1." Kid leaned forward and put his head in Lanya's lap.
"What do you think of our new nest here?"
"Shall I be brutal?"
'You dOn't like it, huh?" Denny moved over to sit next to her. "I
think it's pretty neat. It's a lot better than the other one."
"On my way from the front door, to the bathroom, and then back
to .here, I must have wondered seven distinct times bow you could
stand it!"
"God damn," Kid said, "we roughed idor how long-?"
. "That was outdoors, ill the open air! And we spent most of Our
time by ourselves, away from other people anyway."
574 Dhalgren
"I don't think she likes it here," Denny said, letting his shoulders
drop. "Don't you think nicer than the other place? We got a mattress ... n
"You have fifty people in a space that won't hold-"
"Twenty,' Kid said. "Maybe twenty-five."
"-twenty-eight that I counted just now between the front steps,
the kitchen, the living room, the service porch, the two back roomsin a space that would be crowded with five or six! There is a pHe ·of
shit-human, I assume-by the side of the back steps, which is understandable considering you only have one bathroom. Which I was
in, by the way, and pretty unbelievable. How do you get these
people fed? I mean, I was in the kitchen!"
"We eat pretty well," Denny said. "I think we eat pretty well."
"The lack of privacy would drive me up the wall!"
"You know," Kid said, "that's a funny thing about privacy. If
there're two or three people in a .oom, it's really hard to be by yourself. If there're nine or ten, especially if you're all living together, if
you want to be alone, all you have to do is think I want to be alone
and everybody else has somebody to pay attention to, and you're
alone. I had two roommates in an apartment my first year at Columbia; we had four rooms and it was really impossible. A couple of years
later I spent December, January, February and March in three rooms
on East Second Street in New York with about ten guys and ten
chicks. Cold as a motherfucker, and we were in there all day. All we
did is eat, ball, and deal dope: Nicest time of my life."
"Really?" Then she said, "If it was, how did it compare to this?"
"This is not the nicest time in my life. But there'v. been others a
hell of a lot worse.'
"We got all sorts of good stuff to eat," Denny said. "YOll hungry? I
bet I can fix some stuff up for you?"
"Thanks, babes. But I just finished lunch. "
"We were a lot cleaner there," Kid said, "maybe because there
were a few more girls around."
"Male chauvinist pig," Lanya said dryly. "Import a lot of slave
labor to wash the dishes and-'
"I'm not a male chauvinst pig,' Kid said. "I'm a commie faggot
pervert.»
"There's nothing to stop you from being both."
"Everybody cleaned. Just like here. We made people take their
shoes off when they came in the door. New York sillsh. It's just nice
with more girls."
Palimpsest 575
"You're preaching. That all may be, but it's not here. I can just
manage to resist inviting you to come live with me and be my loves."
"I guess with the place you got, you wouldn't want to come live
here," Denny said. "But YOll could stay for a while."
Raven suddenly stuck his bushy top-knot over the edges. "Hey,
Lady, if they don't want to come live with you, I'd be glad to. I'm
clean, I'm friendly. I do a lot of the cooking around here, too; I'm a
pretty good lay-"
"Get the fuck out of here, cocksucker!' Kid said loudly, leaning
forward.
"Sure.' The top-knot disappeared. "Thought I'd make the offer."
"And don't let anybody else up here. We're busy, huh?"
"Okay," from.below. Bolts and nuts rattled.
"Ohl there're other reasons ): don't move you in.»
"I guess Madame Brown wouldn't l>ke it," Denny said.
"She might not," Lanya said. "But I wasn't thinking of that. I just
feel I need a place to retreat. Where I can go lick my wounds; when I
get wounded.'
"Cool," Kid said.
"Are you afraid of us?" Denny took his hand, which had been between her thighs, away.
"Yes.' She took his hand and put it back. "But you keep things interesting. I don't know why I should be ... oh, nonsense! I can
think of four hundred reasons why I should be-or reasons why
other people would say 1 should be. My own? I suppose I'm doing it
to find out what they are. Pretty defeatist, huh? Okay, I'm just doing
it to find out. "
"1 guess," Denny said, "it's pretty ........ »
" ... he up there?" someone said.
"He's busy. You can't go up there."
"I only want to talk with him a minutel"
"I said hes busy; man. You canJt_"
"Look, lover, I can see the tops of their heads from here so he
can't be doing anything that complicated."
Kid went over to the loft edge. "Bunny?"
"Now, you see-" Bunny came forward-"he hasn't even taken off
his clothes. Hi therel ta-ta-ta, tal-me." Bunny's arms
extended straight up, fell; with them fen smile. "You're supposed to be in charge here, Kid. Have you seen Pepper?"
"Yeah, hes been around.'
"Hi, Bunny." Lanya leaned over the edge. So did Denny.
576 Dhalgren
"Ah-ah-ah!" Bunny shook a finger at her_ ·You know what they say,
dear; one at a time, and slowly. HeRo.' That was to Denny, who was
grinning. "What a charming overbite you have," and looked back at
Kid: "I approve. YOll all cant be abollt to do what I thought you were.
Can I come lip and sit a spell?"
"We probably were," unya said. "But come on."
Bunny raised a platinum brow, forehead wrinkling-or crumpling.
"I don't understand these modern relationships. Beneath my glitterillg exterior, I'm just a sweet, old-fashioned girl. NQ offense, dear,"
and nodded at unya. "Now-How am I supposed to negotiate this?"
Bunny grasped the supporting beam, "Oh, it isn't that hard." Head
and scrawny throat (in a black jerney turtleneck gone limp), cleared
the mattress. "Now how do 1 get the rest of the way?"
"Here." Denny kneeled up and grabbed Bunny's shoulders.
"Oh, watch it, oh watch it, watch it now, I ... OhIo Bunny settled
on the loft edge, black jeans bunched a little at the waist " ... Thanh
you! Wen, 1 must say this is rather cozy. You said Pepper was around]
1 can't tell you what a load that lifts from my frazzled and distorted
little brain. You know, he was staying at my place; a few days ago he
disappeared Again. Well, you know 1 worried. He's managed to take
care of himself one way or the other these past twenty-rune years
without spending too much of that tiroe in jail-did you know he
told me he was once arrested for displaying himself ill public? Isn't
that quaint? But I heard you were running a nest and so 1 thought I'd
take a look-see before I made up my mind whether or not to go frantic with grief.·
"He's around," Kid said. "But 1 don't know if he's here just now.
You want to take him back with YOll? That's fine with me."
Bunny's pupils rolled up. "Oh, I'd give my eye teeth to have him
back.· Bunny's nails, their pearl polish chipped, strayed on the bright
beads that circled the small, dark shoulders. "But then, I'm not going
to try and make the poor baby do anything he doesn't want. 11 isn't
good for him. He's got to learn to do what he thinks best If I go directing his whole life-and you wouldn't believe how much he wants
me to; he practically demands 1 make everything ,"s"",bling a decision for him-he'll never grow up. One has to be responsible to the
people one loves, whichever way they let one.» Bunny, hands folded,
pale and knobbly, frowned from ·one to the other. "Three of you? Darlings, that's going to be so much work! Well, you'll have each other to
lean on in times of crisis.· The frown changed; the hands broke.
Palimpsest 577
"You say 1 can take him away? He hasn't gotten into any trouble
around here, has he?"
"Naw," Kid said. "But I had to make loud noises at someone trying
to give him a rough time."
"You did?" Bunny pulled back. "Not only do you write beautiful
poems, you have a poetic soul! 1 knew it, I knew it when Pepper first
introduced us. That's why I came; because you had a poetic soul."
Bunny pulled back further. "Tell me. In that fifth poem. On page seventeen. 'Mab'; now 1 don't understand the title, and 1 don't know if I
want to, but did I detect a fleeting teference to ... me by any
chance?"
"Yeah." Kid said. "Probably. I was sitting in the john at Teddy's
when I wrote it. You were outside dancing.»
"Ahhhh!" Bunny exclaimed with clasped hands and lowered eyes.
"That's just the most exciting .. .. Ohio Suddenly Bunny's hand
swirled up and overhead. ·Of course, that's nothing to you, dear!" It
landed on unya's 'knee. "1 mean you're practically the Oark udy of
the Spnnets." Now Bunny leaned forward: "Darling, dont make him
miserable." Bunny's hand moved on to brush Denny's shoulder.
Denny frowned at it. "You too. Be kind to him." Bunny turned once
more to Kid. "You're doomed to tragedy, you knOw. The ones of us,
like you and I, with the Ipana smile, we always are. 1 mean who
could possibly love us? And just because our half of the class
brushed with Crest; tragedy begins from such tiny things. But that's
why all of us with the ultra-bright grimaces have to be content to end
up in Hollywood, as movie stars, hideously famous, fabulously rich,
trailing behind us all the heartaches, the broken romances, divorce
after divorce-Look at you! Fame and for·tune are already glittering up
there on South Brisbain. You see? It's begun, already, you poor thing!"
"Far,· Denny said with gravity, "fuclling out.·
unya said: "If Bunny's in your book, you should invite him to the
party."
"Yeah," Kid said. "You want to come? Most of the guys in the nest
are gOing up. So Pepper'll probably be along .•
"Oh, I couldn't!" Bunny's head dropped, with a small shake. "1
couldn't possibly,· then looked up. "I'd just love to, 1 really would.
But 1 can1t!'
"Why not?"
uPrinciples. n
"How do you mean?"
578 Dhalgren
"Well." The space between Bunny's nose and upper lip got longer.
"That astronaut person, Captain Kamp, is going to be there, isn't he?"
"He's Calkins' guest. I guess he will."
why."
Denny said, "Is that the guy you met who:S been on the moon?"
"Um-hm." Kid nodded.
Lany.a said: "I don't understand, Bunny."
"Were you there the night the Captain came to the bad"
"I was, U Kid said.
"Then you know what happened. To me and George."
"No," Kid said, qi donlt.n
Bunny !ook a preparatory breath. "As soon as Teddy realized who
that glorified fish-bait was-and don't you know; someone had to tell
her?-she came over to me and suggested that, considering the clientele that evening, it might be better if 1 didn't dance!"
"No,'U I..anya said.> "You're not serioust are you? Why?H
"He didn"t want to offend the tender sensibilities of our scotchand-water-sipping national hero. They do not, presumably, have go-go
boys On the moon. Teddy figured the shock might be taO much."
"When I came in," Kid sid, "everybody was sitting around having
a chamber of cOmmerce meeting."
"That," Bunny said, "had not begun when Teddy made his pronouncement to me. And when it did, George happened (0 be theF •.
They wore atl sittiug around asking questions, and George was very
interested. So George asked some. One of them-l was watching
born my cagt>-was whether or not Captain Kamp had ever been to
George!; moon. Some people snickered. But George was serious. And
I'll say thiS for the Captain, he answered it perfectly seriously. I mean,
considering the afternoon, it was pretty presumptuoUS to think any
question was that silly. But after a couple more from George, Teddy
went over and said something to him. A minute later, George shoved
back his chair and walked out."
"What did he say?" Denny asked.
"I couldn't hear," Bunny said. "But I certainly could see the effect.
And I know what he said to me."
"George had just left when I came in," Kid said. "Tak told me."
"That sounds so silly," Lany.a exclaimed. "Teddy was always a litde
... formal; but you make him sound like a member ,of the Rotary
Club."
"Daughter of the American Revolution! That naugahyde rimmer of
Palimpsest 579
rusty Chevrolet nineteen-fifty-two exhaust pipes! 1 hope the next
time she sucks off a number she rips his foreskin in her bridgework!" -which collapsed Denny On his back with hysterics. "There
are two reasons-beside the free hooch-that anyone comes into that
roach-infested, crab-breeding collapsed douche bag. One is George.
The other is me ... Oh, yes! A few have wandered by; hoping they
might be lucky enough to get a look at the Kid. But don't worry, just
give that neo-Nazi time and he'll start asking you to wear a tie next
lime you come. Mark mother's wise, wise words."
"That's too silly," Lany.a said and made an ugly face.
'If I saw George," Kid said, "I was going to invite him. I guess he
won't want to go now either?"
"Well," Bunny said, ,"George is a slighdy larger luminary in our local
skies; he can, perhaps, afford to be more generous than I. I, I'm afraid,
must guard my honor more jealously. After all, dear, it's aliI have."
"Next time I saw Kamp," Kid said "he was down at the blowout
George gave for the Reverend Taylor in Jackson."
"Eunny," Lany.a said, "you arE being silly! About the party, I mean.
Kid didn't invite Teddy, he invited you. And for all you know; Kamp
came down preCisely to see you do your act; Teddy was being stupid
and presumptuous. That shouldn't stop you from having a good time.'
"I will not," Bunny said, "go up there and perform for those people."
"Nobody's going to ask you to dance-"
'Yon don't understand, dear heart." Once more Bunny touched
Kid's knee. "As far as Calkins is concerned, or any of them up there:
you, me, or anybody you know just going up to make an appearance,
is putting on a performance. Calkins set up that bar, put Teddy in
charge of it. The whole place exisis only for his amusement or the
amusement of his guests the once a month they should feel like coming down to slum. And while I don't believe for an instant he gave
Teddy orders that I wasn't to be exhibited to his new young man from
Mars or whatever, it's an attitude inevitable in such a chain, whether
there's money iuvolvedor not. I simply cannot be a part of it. Negroes
and homosexuals, dear! Negroes and homosexuals! Having been
lumped together in so many cUches for so long, we are beginning to
learn. With women and children-" Bunny nodded toward Lany.a
and Denny- "it's taking a litde longer. Well, you have a few more
cliches to overcome. You mustn't think I'm trying to throw a wet
afghan over the festivities. You've written a beautiful book-though I
didn't understand a line-and you should go up there and bave your
580 Dhalgren
party, and I hope it's perfectly wo fabulous. I really do. I shall JUSt
drool over the accounts in the society page next day. But I have to live
with myself. You're a dear, dear boy to ask me. And I'm just too
crushed that I cannot accept."
"You're not going to dance at Teddy's no more?" Denny asked.
"That-" Bunny's hand refolded- "is another thing. No, I still
dance there. Every night, three shows. Matinees on Saturdays and
Sundays, as soon as brunch is cleared. Oh, we creative types must
put up with so much just to do, as it were, our thing. Misery. Pure
misery. Shame and humiliation." Bunny regarded Kid. "Oh, you're
going to suffer SO much it makes me want to weep. But that's the
price of having a poetic soul."
"If Teddy is that big a bastard," Denny asked, "why don't you just
stop danCing for him?"
Bunny raised an upturned palm. "If 1 don't dance there, where else
can I? I mean here. in Bellona? But we must stop all this. All I'm
doing is making me feel sorry for myself. And you're snickering. You
said that Pepper was here ... where-" Bunny's voice dropped-"do
you think I should look?"
"Come on," Kid said. "I'll give you the grand tour."
"Oh, now, you don't have to do-•
Kid pushed himself out between UlRya and Denny and dropped to
the floor.
"-let me see, how do I get down from here? My, this is complicated;
don't you think a-oh dear/-ladder would be much easier thanthere:!n
"I'll be back in a second," Kid said to the two faces regarding him
over the edge. He stepped around Raven, who glanced up from tinkering On the floor, and, followed by Bunny, went into the hall.
"You know," Bunny came abreast of Kid. "I can't tell you how relieved you've made me feel. Just to know he's here and all right. What
I see in him I'm sure I'll neVer knOw. But sometimes he smiles, and I
go aU cream custard inside. Or calves-foot aspic. Yes, much more like
calves-foot aspic. I mean it's all clear and quivery and cool!"
"Not like an eclair?" Kid felt quieted and pensive from Bunny's
lale.
"EXactly not like an eclair!" Bunny smiled a white, white smile.
"You do know!"
"He isn't yard." Kid leaned out onto the porch, then pulled
back.
Palimpsest 581
"I didn't see him with any of those boys on the front steps."
Bunny said. "And he wasn't in the kitchen or the front room. n
"Let's try in here." Kid pushed open the door.
Among ,the sleeping scorpions (Dollar had mrned over on his
stomach) Pepper, curled on his side in a pile of blankets, hanks of
chain over his bony shoulders, fists thrust into the groin of his jeans,
slept and hissed through the limp hair across his face.
"He always sleeps like that," Bunny said quietly.
"You want to wake him up and-?"
"Nol" Bunny whispered, and raised a wrist before pursed lips. "No
... I just wanted to, well ... you knOw." Bunnys smile was worked
through with concern. "That's fine. Really. Just to know he's all right.
That's all I wanted. One has to be responsible for them, but in ways
... in ways they can understand.' Bunny's head sbook. "And understanding, as I'm sure you know, is not Pepper's strong point. Corne,
Corne. There's no need to wake anyone.' Black Spider had rolled over
and raised his head.
At Bunny's gesture, Kid closed the door.
"Thank you, thank you. A million times, thank you. I've got to
run along to greet my audience with-n Bunny thrust out a hip and
closed an eye-"the real ,thing. You're a perfect love. Ta-ta!" Hallway
up the hall Bunny turned back and flung out one hand while the
other wound among the optic beads. "And have a fabulous time at
your party. You were too good to' ask me. Thank you, thank you. You
really are too good. Drink a glass of champagne for old Bun-buns,
and remember, whatever happens, give 'em hellI"
California and Revelation hail stopped to stare. Lady of Spain
Carne out of the front room behind them, leaned on their shoulders,
and grinned.
Bunny blew all three kisses, fled to ,the front door, opened it, turned,
sang out, with flourishing arms: "'The shadow of your smHe .. .'" in
an astonishing bass; then shrilled, "Bye-bye!" and was gone.
Pondering, Kid went back to the loft.
Seated Raven had a loop of wire and two screws in his mouth.
"Who was that?" he asked, voice mangled by metal.
Kid just laughed and climbed up the post. "God damn," he said.
"Couldn't you wait for five minutes to get started?"
Denny, naked, lay on top. unya still wore her blouse.
"We haven't slarted very seriously," Lanya said around Denny's
forearm.
582 Dhalgrell
"Yeah?" Kid climbed up and pushed his hand between their hips
(Denny rocked up, Umya pulled down). "Oh; yeah." He took alI his vest
They made love, breathing softly with wide mouths. For a while,
with his belt and pants open, Kid refused to take his pants off-
("I'm sorry, lJidy, you.can'tgo up there. Kid's busy."
("He ballin-?n
("Yeah. Come back later.")
-but after a while they tickled him and, while he lay laughing,
pulled them down. Huddled with their heads together, Denny whis·
pered, "That was nice, huh? Lemme fuck you in the pussy and you
can fuck me in the ass again while I'm doing it."
"Marvelo1!ls,' lJinya said and buried her laughter on Kid's shoulder.
I.ISure/1 Kid said. "If you want. Sure.lI'
But, with knees uncomfortably wide, elbows bent, and the boy's
dry back brushing his belly, Kid's penis, pulling along the flexing
crevice, lay limp. He started to say something, thought better, and
kissed Denny's shoulder, kissed him again. .
lJinya opened her eyes and, through her catching and catching
breath, frowned. She worked one hand free, and licked and licked
her fingers. Then she reached around Denny's back. First just the side
of her thumb touched his cock. Then his movement in her fist's tunnel made the thing that was not a muscle tighten (and whole webs
above and around his pubis that were, relax). His penis filled through
her grip.
"I like that ... ' Denny panted when Kid was inside him.
"It's pretty good ... » Kid got out, shifted his weight, and decided
that lJinya had the right idea: Talking was silly. He didn't come in
Denny's ass, but in hers.
They lay on their sides, lJinya sandwiched between. .
"I can feel him,' Denny whispered, "Moving. tI\side your cunt, on
my dick, I can feel him."
"50," she whispered, "can I," and Shhhhhed him. Both Kid's hands
were around her chest. Someone held his thumb. He thought it was
her because she always used to, but it was Denny. Once he rose from
half sleep to hear them giggling together. He shifted his fmgers on
the live warmth of her breast. Someone squeezed his thumb again.
He woke, suddenly and full}' They were both stilL His cock waS
erect; but as he raised his head to look down at him, he felt it soften.
He had roRed slightly to the side. His penis lowered toward lJinya's
thigh.
It is not touching her, he thought.
Then, the slightest warmth. And pressure.
1t is touching her.
Palimpsest 583
Eyes wide, he rolled back, trying to understand by blunt reason
that terrifying and marvelous transition.
1 am limited, finite, and fixed. I am in terror of the infmity before
me, having come through the one behind bringing no knowledge I
can take on. I commend myself up to what is greater than I, and try
to be good. That is wrestling with what 1 have been given. Do l rage
at what I have not? (Is infinity some illusion generated by the way in
which time is perceived?) I try to end this pride and rage and commend myself to what is there, instead of illusion. But the veil is the
juncture ofth. perceived and perception. And what in life can rip
that? Is the only prayer, then, to live steadily and dully, doing and
doubting what the mind demands? I am limited, finite, and fixed. 1
rage for reasons, cry for pity. Do with me what way you will.
5
Hewoke ...
As Kid sat, hand fell from his. lJinya rolled back a little to
press against him again.
Kid's side cooled.
He thought of her side cooling.
He watched Denny, in sleep, rub his stomach where she had just
lain. Kid's pants were wedged against the wall. Hanging his feet over
the edge, he shook out the rumpled legs. He lifted one knee and set
his heel on the chain. What circled his mind, what kad been running
there since sleep, was: •... Susan Morgan, William Dhalgren, Peter
Weldon ... Susan Morgan, William Dhalgren, Peter Weldon ... "
Pondering, he shook it out.
He pushed his feet out the cuffs, got his boot, his vest, his chains,
and swung around to the post and climbed down. Raven was gone.
He noticed the silence just as it ended with voices in the other
rooms. He could not decide whether it had been a few coincident
seconds, or a protracted hush, begun before his waking, ending.
Restless, he walked into the hall.
And recognized her blue sweatshirt as she turned into the service
pon:h. When he reached the door, she was going down the steps into
the yard. He followed.
58'1 Dhalgren
Halfway into evening, tAe sky above the littered and trampled dirt
was without feature.
Angel, Filament, and Thruppence, under Copperhead's supervision, were ,trying to start a fire.
Raven, Spider, D-t, and jack tbe Ripper, with Tarzan the one white
among them, sat on crates or stood at the back of the yard, passing
two gallon jugs, both half empty, and arguing.
She looked up, saw him at the head of the steps, and (he thought}
started. "Hi,' she said with a very puzzled look and brushed a feathering of hair back from her face.
"Hey." He came down the steps.
She looked at his foot.
It had been a long time since he had even been around anyone
who noticed his half-shod eccentricity. He thought about me coming
party, found his mind rummaging again through Bunny's tale of the
afternoon, and pushed away the discomfort with laughter .
. She looked more uncomfortable. "I just wanted to come over and
say hello to some of the guys,» she explained. "I'm living over there,
now," indicated only with a turned head that turned right back. "You
know that commune you guys used (0 hit lip in the park? Well, some
of the ones from there come over to' our place a lot-our house is just
girIs-but anybody can come and visit."
Kid nodded.
She folded her arms across the full, faded sweatshirt. "This place
is-" she looked around the rubble-"is sort of nice."
"You come. over heret-o see Denny?'"
She looked down at her baggy elbow. "What do you want with
him? I mean what are you-" she tightened her arms-"going t<> do
with him? I want him back."
Jack the Ripper glanced across Ihe fireplace, glanced away. Kid
thought: She has learned, when she lived like thiS, to hold such conVelse in a space full of people. "r want him. What do you need him for?"
He thought she was going to cry, but she just coughed.
"He just iSD't that smart. Those poems you wrote? I read them,
all of them. When I was in school, we read poetry and stuff and I
liked it. I was the smartest person in my class-one of them, anyway. Denny won't read them because he can't even say the words.
You ever hear him try to read the newspaper? But I read them. The
part about me bringing you the whisky when you were in the bathPalimpsest 585 tub washing alI the blood, and saying good-bye? I read about that and I understood it. But the stulI in there about him, if he read it, he wouldn't even gel it I bet. What do you want him for, huh? Why don't you give him back?" She began to look to either side. "I'm sorry." "r don't keep him from seeing you." "I she said. "I'm sorry. rm gonoa go. 1'1 She dropped her arms and went around him to go up the stairs. unya, in jeans and blouse, stood in the doorway. The two girls looked at one another. Then the one in the blue sweatshirt Sighed. Lanya glanced after her, then looked back at Kid. Kid frowned. Jack the Ripper, by the fire now, looked over, his smile between syrnpatb.y and complicity, and shook his head. Kid walked up the steps. "You just get up?" "Only seconds, I'm sure, after you did. I heard you talking to her when we came out on the porch; so I decided I'd come out and listen. She seems like a nice kid." He shrugged. "Denny still asleep?" QNope.11 Kid sat on the step below her. They both had to move legs when Devastation came down to wander over to the fire, to stand with his hands in his back pockets. "He got up with me," Lanya explained. "We were going to come out and surprise you while you were wandering around looking pre- occupied. I told him We couldn't do it if you were anywhere near a pencil and paper. But then, when we got to the porch, we saw you talking to her." "Where's Denny?" "He saw her, covered hiS mouth with both hands-l thought he was going to blurt alit something, God knows what-ducked behind me, and ran. I'm not sure if hel; locked himself in the bathroom, or just split. No, the bathroom doesn't have a lock, does it? She didn't see him-he made enough noisel" She rested her chin on her fist. "The poor girl. I feel sorry for her." "Mean little bastard, isn't he?" "You think 50?" "He is to her. He is 10 you. To me. I can take it." Kid shrugged. "What are you going te) do when he decides one day when you Come to see him he doem't want to see you?"
586 DhaZgren
"Take it, I suppose." She Sighed. "He really should have talked to
her. Howald is he?'
"Fifteen. ARd she's seventeeR.·
'You should tell him to talk to her. If they were really all that close."
"Shit," Kid said. "I never argue with people I screw. She seems to
think there isn't anything to say. I.don't blame her for wishing there
was."
"Maybe.' Lmya souRded doubtful. "I sort of took a liking to her,
just listening. She lives in the girls' house? Now that is a strange
bunch. I've beeR there a few times."
"Dykes?"
"No more than here. Do you think she'd be interested in helping
with the schoo!?"
"You're just going to get yourself in trouble.·
Lanya laughed. "It's So nice to MOW there're one Or two things
about which 1 am more. worldly than you are! I think its fine to have
.R occasional knock·down, drag.out ... discussion with people
you're screwing. I never quarrel with the people the people I'm
screwing are screwing. Or were screwing. 1 make a point of being on
the best terms possible. Even if you have a knack for it, sometimes it
takes a lot of work. But the trouble you avoid-" she turned down
her mouth and tapped her knee three times-"is 1I0t ,(Q be believed!"
Then she tugged his hair. "Let's go look for him.'
But Denny had left the house.
Back in the yard the fire had been completed. umya volunteered
to go with Priest, Thruppence aRd Angel to the liquor store. When
they came back, Kid had taken the door out of the back room and set
it up on some boxes for a table in the yard. Others had begun food.
"Come on. 1 want to go back up in the loft."
"Sure." She squeezed his hand and followed.
When they had lain together, when they had talkedquielly a
while, when they had begun to make love, he was surprised to find
her somewhat listless and distracted; small movements she made
silently angered him. Till she said, "Hey, what's the matter? You seem
so fat away. Come on back: which returned ,the whole thing to the
realm of the humorous.
After that it was very good.
After coming, while he lay there and held her, the smell woke
hi-m. His waking woke her. He lifted his head at the sound. A third
plale, in raised haRds, was pushed over the loft edge. Then Denny
Palimpsest 587
climbed up, crawled across them, and began to take off his clothes.
·We can eat up here," he whispered, as though they might still be
sleeping with opened eyes.
There were lots of frankfurters on the plates.
And vegetable hash.
"Where'd you get off to?" •
Denny shrugged. "Just wandering around. Thirteen's got a place
right down the block and across the street. Pretty nice." He up
a frank in his fingers and bit. Juice ran down his forearm and dripped
from his elbow to his knee.
Kid licked it off. ·You're gonna gimme a hard·on," Dermy said and
pushed one of the plates to Lmya. "Here. You wanna eat?"
"Sure." She rubbed her eyes and pulled out of Kid's arms. "Where
... oh, hey. Thanks!" to the bite of Denny's he offered from his hand.
Remembering not a moment of grace, but a moment laced with it,
I am thrown back on a present where only the intensity of the senses
can justify this warmth, the look of shadow on her shoulder, light on
his hip, a reflection on the blackened glass, light up from below :hat
is not as good. What I have fallen from, perfected by memory mto
something only pOSSible, 1 do not want to falsify any more than that.
Now there are only the eyes and the hands to fill out.
They drank some of the braRdy he'd had her get for Tak. ("You
won't believe my dress, either of you. I know you've seen it, Kid. You
still won't believe it.") She said she was going to go home soon, but
fell asleep. Somebody yelling in kitchen once woke them hours
later and they all made love again in the dark.
For the second time, from an urge that crossed experimentation
with duty, he sucked Denny off; it took twice as long as before.
"[Jon' t you think you ought to rest?" Lanya finally suggested.
W¥eah, n Denny said.. "You rest some. II
So he closed his eyes and racked it up to foibles. Still, it was the
best time he remembered. He drifted toward sleep, ouly sad he re·
membered so little, and closed his eyes.
When the window had gone indigo, Kid opened them. La·nya was
kneeling up. "I'm gOlag now," she whispered. So they crawled over
Denny, to fmd their clothes. "But I want some coffee," she mouthed.
"There should be boxes around," Kid said. "We just don't have
any pot."
all right. Come on."
In the kitchen, Thirteen and Smokey, with three black scorpions,
588 Dhalgren
Raven, Thruppence, and D-t, up the night, sat talking. Kid was surprised when, from the bant«r, he realized Lanya knew all their
names: Even Thruppence's. (He'd had to ask that one several times:
"Thruppence, man. Thruppence. That's English for three cents.") And
"D-t," he found out, stood not for Delirium tremens but Double-time.
A bllcket was the only thing really clean so Lanya filled it to make
boiled colIee.
'You gonna drink that?" D-t asked her.
"Sure. Bring it to a boil three times, then throw in a glass of cold
water. The egg white will make it settle. Then you just pour it alI into
a pot and keep it hot," for which purpose Smokey volunteered to
clean the kettle.
"You just don't let the Spider know you used up two of his good
eggs to make that mess."
u5hit,1I Raven said, "everybody else use 'em."
Kid and Lanya drank· theirs black while the rest went through a
of powdered milk (someone remembered the box under
the table), cup rinsing, and sugar.
"Now that's nice colIee," Raven (his top-knot, now, undone) admitted, gazing into the cup on the table. "It's just a.dear! I gotta remember me that' He pouted heavy lips at the steam and shook his head.
The hairy beachba11 swung side to side.
'Yeah," Thirteen said back Over his shoulder. "You gonna retnember that, Smokey?" who nodded.
Cathedral and Filament had come in sleepily from the other room.
Nine people stood drinking colIee in a space that was crowded with
four.
"Now rm JUSt across the street and down the block," Thirteen was
saying. "On the top floor. Any of you guys come over who want to.
Kid'U teU you, he stayed in my place. I got so many scorpions around,
you'd think I was running a nest. But I ain't. ljust like to be friendly,
you know?"
"You want to staYo" Kid told tinya as they left, 'you just go back
up in the lofl. Nobody's going to bother you."
She rubbed the back of her neck. "There're just some things I have
to get done before school. Give Little Brother a hug for me."
Nevertheless, as he walked her home, he was pretty sure what she
wanted was another two hours sleep. He asked, "You coming back
tonight?"
She squee%ed his hand. "Nope. You two 'tan come up a",d See me if
you've got time. For a little while." She squeezed his hand once more.
Palimpsest 589
The gesture became an emblem of her nervous charm.
The paper that day said:
Sunday-July 14th, 1776.
They spent the night at Lanya's.
The next day:
SundaY-lune 16th, 200l.
That afternoon tire-colored Jack the Ripper, crouching before the
open icebox whose light had just blown, whose insides were
crammed, and whose enamel was streaked and stained, looked up
and asked, when you gonna Tun?ll
'Right now!" Inception, impulse, and decision had all fixed betWeen Kid's first word and his second. Kid grabbed the doorway,
leaned into the next room and shouted, "WE'RE GONNA RUN ... !'
D-t, Spider, Angel, Priest crowded in from Ihe hallway.
California shucked qUickly from the sleeping bag beside the couch.
Raven and Glass and Lady of Spain came into the kitchen.
Spitt pushed in through the scorpions crowding the doorway.
They swayed and moved their feet and looked uncomfortably serious.
·Come on: Denny was saying as the others clattered down the
front steps. "Hey, you! You gonna come? Get on out her«."
Within the house he had almost been able to imagine a lucid City.
Now catatonic windows watched them stalk. Their boots crunched
and thudded on the pavement. They hurried with lowered brows,
staring out from under, looking left and right on the neutral avenues.
Kid remembered, later, breaking the plate window of the Second
City Bank building.
Jack the Ripper danced on broken glass and cackled: 'Man, we
gonna bust up nigger-townt now!"
They didn't.
They shuffied and poked at papers and files and adding machines.
Copperhead turned over a desk and stood looking at it, breathing
hard, a full minute.
They found neither money nor locked boxes; the only things in
the money drawers were paperclips, gummed reinforcements, rubberbands.
Kid climbed back over the brass bars of a teller's cage (the top was a
strip of greasy filth; a lot was on his hands now), dropped to echOing
marble, and walked to a group with their backs to him. He shouldered
between Tarzan and Thruppence.
Knee on the cushion (he took sharp, shallow breaths), Dollar
590 Dhalgren
jabbed an orchid-blade into the leather chair and ripped with caged
and quivering fist. More stuffing pushed out. Catching his tongue tip
in his teeth, he jabbed and ripped again.
Priest sniffed and took his hand from his pocket.
Filament tried not to clear her throat.
As they walked home, Kid searched his memory of what had occurred On Nightmare's run to the Emboriky. Among the black group
strolling at his side Kid noticed blond Tarzan at their center. Raven,
his arm around Tanan's shoulder, was saying, ' ..• your sister? Man,
you got you a pretty sister. Tarzan, you got about the prettiest sister 1
ever seen. You gonna have to get me and that sister of yours together!
Dooooo-whee!" On Wltee! he yanked at the crotch of his jeans willI
his free hand and nearly tugged Tarzan over.
"Now what you gonna talk about his sister for?" Lady of Spain
asked.
"Aw, shit," Raven shouted over his shoulder, all his hair swaying.
"Tarzan and me are friends. That right, Tarzan?" who grinned across
the forearm beaeath bis chiB.
"Tarzan," Glass grunted at Kid, "and the fuckin' apes!"
"Hey!» Jack the Ripper punched at Glass' shoulder. "Who's a
Cuckin' ape, nigger?"
But when Kid and Glass looked back, the Ripper let both legs go
bandy. wheeled his arms about his shoulders, and began to bound
about and grunt. Chains flew around his head. Now and then he
paused to scratch his sides with his underhanded flaps.
Copperhead's laugh was louder and harsher than ,the others', rising
and dying, as though responding to nuances of the performance no
one else could catch.
Raven still draped around Tarzan, they staggered on. Ravens expreSsion was now haunted and grim. Tarzan, hands hanging from his
pockets and elbows swinging, smi'led at the pavement over which
they lurched, happily centered in so much attention.
The next day was:
Sunday-Jaauary 1st, 1979
(Headline:)
HAPPy NEW YEAR!
"You sure you don't want to come?" Kid asked P.epper. Kid's face still
stung from shaving.
"Naw:" Pepper shuffled nervously before the bathroom door.
Palimpsest 591
"Naw, I don't like stuff like that. All them people I don't know. You
just go on, tell me about it when you come back. I got some wine,
frem the liquor store."
"Okay.» Kid took his hand from Pepper's shoulder.
Copperhead came out of the bathroom. "Hey, you sure we don't
got to dress up?"
"You Wear your chains," Kid said, "your lights, and your vest, and
you're dressed."
"Okay.» Copperhead said. "If you say so. Man, Nightmare sure
looks something out there in them red velvet pants. Like a God-damn
spade!"
Kid's concession to festive dress, besides washing and shaving, had
been to hang his brass orchid from a neck chain. As he walked up the
hall-a water drop ran his bare ankle-the Ripper stopped him to
whisper: "You really gonna let that boy go up there like that?" which
was the third time someone had said something about Baby, who had
arrived ten minutes ago, naked (as promised) and dirty (as ever),
with Nightmare, Dragon lady, and Adam.
"Sure am.n
"Oh, man, I gotla see this. I was gonna stay home, you know? But
I got to go to this One just to watch.'
"He doesn't have anything you don't except a foreskin," Kid said.
"Can't you be cool, huh?"
"Oh, sure!" The Ripper beat down the doubt with his wide, black
hand. "Sure.' He laughed and went on.
In the front room, Nightmare ntrned around and said something
to Kid, mauled beyond comprehensibility by laughter. The others
laughed too. His thick braid glistened with d,ressing. To his leather
vest, neck chains, chained cycle boots, and garrison belt, the velvet
loaned a scarlet panache.
"Nightmare," Siam (who only wore a small bandage now) was
saying, "you're wearing those pants so low your ass has got cleavage,
manl"
"ShiU" Nightmare caressed his great shoulder. "They like to see
my muscles!· There was only a trace of the shoulder scar.
Kid glanced down at his own, listening to the laughter.
Dragon lady. legs crossed, sat on the couch: white Levi's, white
boots, a silver lame turtleneck, and over it a white Levi jacket, sleeves
torn off. Her usual chains (a trip to the hardware store?) had been replaced by silver-or at any rate, siainless steel. Her nails were painted
platinum. When she threw her head back to laugh On her big,
592 Dhalgren
stained teeth. sweat glistened just below her rough hair. She looked
easy, elegant. and terrifying.
Adam. brown and glum looking. sat on the couch arm in his
baggy pants and sneakers.
Baby sat on the floor in front of him. one dirty foot on top of the
other, arms wrapped around his knobbly knees, a grubby hand on
each grubby elbow, smiling like a happy, blond rat.
"Hey! Hey. come on! Now listen to this!" Blonder than Tarzan
(who stood, oddly suHen, by the kitchen door), blond as Bunny, Revelation, perched on'the back of the chair, turned over the Times and
pulled aside his chains. He wore twice as many as anyone else, all
brass and copper: .' ... late in the afternoon yesterday, stalked
through the streets ofJackson, terrorizing residents.' How you like
that? So you guys wete OUI terrorizing the spades yesterday? Huh?"
His skin was the luminous pink some p.I. flesh becomes either in
great cold or great heat.
"' ... Committing acts of vandalism, the damage for which there
is no way to assess, the rowdy band of black and white youths.
necks hung with the chains that we have come to associate with the
scorpions-In
"We didrrt terrorize nobody!" Denny (black shirt, silver fringe.
beneath his vests and chains) sat with his back against the wall.
"There wasn't nobody on the God-damn streetl"
cause they were all terrorized," Revelation explained.
"Don't you see.?"
" .. , 'breaking into the Second City Bank-?'"
"Shit," Thruppence said (who had borrowed one of Denny's
shirts) "we didn't do nothing yesterday:"
·We robbed a {uckin' bank!" Filament (who had commandeered
another) countered. "What do you mean we didn't do nothing? We
robbed a whole God-damn bank!" She clasped her hands before her
chin and looked delighted.
"A {uckin' bank?" Nightmare said. "Man, you're into some heavy
stuff."
Spider, the youngest, blackest. and tallest scorpion in Kid's nest.
leaned against the wall, rubbing the chains on his stomach, echoing
Adam.
.', .. It is nearly impossible. given our situation in Bellona, to
identify any individuals in such an incident. Our reports are all from
people behind locked doors and closed shutters. , ,'"
"lean see aU them mothenuokers ROW,n Dollar said, too loud even
Palimpsest 593
for this merriment., "starin' at us out the peepholes. Just a-starin'.
God damn!" .
"' ... Their number has been estimated anywhere from forty to
preposterous figures in the high hundreds ... m
"You mean,· Copperhead demanded with lip-thinning satisfaction
"twenty of us made enough noise so that they thought we was in
high hundreds?" He stood, triumvirate with Spitt and Glass; all three,
staunch to dictum, had made no change in dress.
Glass wore his black vinyl vest.
Spitt wore his projector and his scar and his turquoise buckle.
Between Spitt and Copperhead, Kid saw the little girl in the maroon
jeans. Her blue blouse was very clean but unIToned. She kept raising
her hand to flatten the collar, glanCing down at herself, and rubbing
her collar again, For the first time she seemed pretty: Kid tried to remember what his reaction had been to her before and what had
changedit.
" ... ' in the high hundreds," Revelation repeated, "'which we
would like to think-"
"Maybe they ain't talking about you?" Dragon Lady suggested.
"Sure they're talking about us!" Priest insisted.
'We're the only ones who robbed a bank yesterday, I God-damn
guess!"
"'-to think preposterous!" which made Revelation laugh so hard
he crumpled the paper.
"W,e gonna go to ,this fuckin' party tOnight?" Camedral demanded,
catchmg both door jambs and swinging his bulk into the room. He
swung back. The optic strand glittered around his brown neck creased
twice wivh fat. "What we waiting for?· '
Kid grinned, nodded-was astonished at the silence. "Come on!"
They pouted after him, laughing and shouting once more, out the
front door and down the steps.
Pepper moved aside quickly:
"Change your mind yet?· Kid asked.
Pepper grinned his ruined grin. "Naw, I just don't feel like it you
know? I don't go for that stuff." His eyes flicked from Kid's. '
Kid looked too.
From the bottom of the steps, among the milling scorpions,
Tarzan watched; with a look of disgust he shook his head, turned
away:
"Her- don't let Tarzan stop you from coming," Kid said, suddenly
angry: rn put the horsemen-" he nodded toward Copperhead and
594 Dhalgrll1l
company-"on him so fast he won't be able to remember-" he started to say: his name-"what he thought it was he didn't like about
you."
"Naw," Pepper said. "Naw, that ain't it. I'd just be all ... Look, 1
thought I'd get me some wine, see. And maybe go over and say hello
to Bunny. 1 ain't seen Bunny in a God-damn long time. She crazy, you
. kuow? She really a nut. But sheS a good guy."
"Okay.' Kid grinned back. "You do that."
"Uh .. . ' Pepper said after him, "you have a nice time at the
party ... " .
"Oh, hey ... I Hey ... ! Come on, hey!" somebody shouted as Kid
descended among them.
They started up the al1ey.
"Which way?" Nightmare called over a cluster of black heads in
which, like respectively a lemon, a kumquat, and a dandelion among
plums. were Tarzan's and and Revelation's.
"Up this way. We have to,pick up somebody."
Smoke encysted the corner street lamp in a giant pearl.
"God damn!" Somebody coughed. "How do you guys stand all thisl"
(Kid couldn't see her because they had left the doorway's light.)
"You JUSt ain't been here 10Bg enough, man! You'll get so you can't
breathe without it afler a while!"
"Somebody turn on some God-damn lights!" Kid called out, feeling across his chest for his projector. "Come on, huh?"
Dragon Uidy's dragon rose, luminous jade, ahead. The mantis and
the grilIin flared, swaying, with misty penumbras.
An indigo spider flickered, mandibles higher than Kid's headflickered out once around Copperhead, then gained full brightness
like tardy neon.
Glass disappeared inside his newt.
Spitt's beetle glistened up like bottle glass.
Nightmare turned to Kid and grinned. "You got it pretty bright
tonight, Kid," and flashed out beneath raised pincers.
Plastic colorsopalled in the smoke.
Peacock (that was the Ripper), manticore, and iguanodon, the
spectral menagerie turned up the avenue.
6
"Are you sure thiS is where Uinya lives?" Kid asked DenBy. The others milled about the stoop.
Palimpsest 595
"Yeah," Denny said "Yeah! Sure, ring the bell."
Kid did. Moments laler, after footsteps (and he heard someone say,
nOh, dear ... " behind the peephole), she opened the door and
stepped out, all silver, into the smoky light.
"God damnJ" Raven said appreciatively behind him.
Uinya shaded her eyes, looked about, said, "My God!" and burst
out laughing .
Madame Brown, in something blue and ,tailored, stepped out behind her, looking tentative. The diffused light gave back to her heavy
face the lines and over-madeup quality Kid had first seen by candle
light. Once more her hair was harsh henna. And her neck bound
and bound around again with ,the optical beads, looked far heavily decorated-yet it was the same way she wore them with her daytime browns and beiges.
Muriel barked once, leaped forward, and came up on the end of
the leash.
nOh, why don't you leave her home?" Uinya coaxed. "Look at our
escort. We'll be ........ no
"Kid doesn'l mind Muriel coming along; do you Kid? You said
Roger had all those grounds. She'll be a perfect dear."
"Naw," Kid said, and discovered, saying it, he did. "Bring her along!"
·She just gets so lonely if 1 don't take her with me." Madame
Brown surveyed the arrayed scorpiOns.
Muriel tried to run down the porch steps, couldn't and barked
again.
"Hush! now! rI Madame Brown said. "Hushl U
"Here, I'm giving this to you." Uinya handed Denny the piece of
equipment Tak had taken from the warehouse with the cloth. "Put it
in your shirt pocket for me?"
The silver fringe on Denny:' sleeve shook in curtains of light as he
put the control box away.
Lanyatook Kid's hand. Her dress was sleeveless, scoop-necked,
and reached the ground. She leaned to whisper: "I've got something
for YOl!! too," and handed him her harmonica. "Put this in your pants
pocket for me?"
"Sure. Q
Feeling the metal on his thigh through the dime-sized ,tear, Kid
stepped down amoBg the others. Uinya, Muriel, and Madame Brown
cam .. behind.
As they starled, he heard Madame Brown: "Your arm looks a lot
better. It hasn't been giving you any trouble?"
596 Dhalgren
"No ma'am," Siam answered. "Not much. Any more. But 1 thought
I was gonna die when you just poured all that iodine in there." He
laughed.
They crossed the street.
"That was the only way 1 could think to keep it from getting in·
feeted. You were veI}\ very brave.'
·Shit," Siam said. "1 hollered like a motherfucker-pardon, miam.
But you remember how they were holding me down."
"Yes. And 1 still think you were brave."
"It's nice of you to say so. But if one of them niggers had let go of
me, I'd a' probably kiHed you.' He laughed again.
They spread ,the Sidewalk, the street, each beast sailing on a pool
oflighl.
Windows dripped with molten reflections-those with panes.
Perhaps half had their shields lit anyone time. A boisterous black
in silhouette would turn on a bright hippogryph, a mantichore; SOme
gorgeous parrot or lizard would collapse around an ambling, side·lit
figure-Kid tried to recall what that one had been, but her apparition,
among so many, attracted his attention only by vanishing.
Dragon Lady, lights out, looked skeptically at Lanya, said to Kid, "I
thought you said this weren't no dress-up party."
"Then you and I," Lanya told her, "will look that much better'"
Dragon Lady laughed. "You and me? Oh, honey, we. sure will!· She
dropped back and linked her silver arm in Lanya's bare One. "We
gonna strut out fine, honey, and make them sons of bitches suffer!"
Which made Lanya laugh. For a block the three of them walked arm
in arm in arm.
But at some altercation ahead, Dragon Uidy flared in jade and hastened forward to quell it:
Revelation Ca frog) had started quarreling with Cathedral (some
large bird that could, Kid realized on closer view, have been intended
as an American eagle): The dragon moved between them, making
mofe noise than both; they qUieted.
Behind and to the side, Tarzan fingered, but hesitated to ignite, his
parti-colored gila monster.
"That one ... ?" Madam Brown nodded ahead with a deep frown
and theatrical restraint. "Have you noticed, but every time his griffin
flickers-" which it just did, revealing stringy yeflow hair, knobbly
spine, pockmarked buttocks, and grime-rimmed heels-"but doesn't
it look just like he doesn't have any clothes On at all?'
Palimpsest 597
"He doesn't.' Kid said.
"Is there anything wrong with him?" Madame Brown demanded.
"Is he all right?"
Her tone had changed from smutty complicity to puritan distress.
Kid recognized each but could not follow the mechanics of trarisition;
he grew fearful of the light-headedness in which his mind bobbed.
"No. He just doesn't have any," he explained, wondering if he were
losing again his ability to follow logical connections.
Madame Brown said, DOh ... " in a tone at total odds with either
previous.
They swarmed across the little park between Brisbains.
"I hope we get a ride back,' Lanya said. "This is a long enough·
walk sober."
"Don't cOunt on it.»
"Roger is always talking in the paper about driving people in and
out of town. Maybe he could have one of his drivers run us home after-
"I've seen his car. something from the thirties. Besides, how'd
we fit all these people in?"
"You're just too democratic for words.' She kissed his cheek. "Do
you think I look nice?"
"Didn't I say 50?ft
"You did not. Nor did you say, 'You really made that dress yourself?' Or any of those things for which I'd prepared such very clever
answers. lI
"Did you really make that dress yourself?" Kid slipped his hand
around the tickling material on her waist. "It looks nice."
"Don't press too hard," she said. "I don't want W injure the material.
No, no ... I'm not driving you away! II
"I think you look nice," Denny said. "I think ... ' He wlrispered in
her ear.
"Young man!" Lanya said. "I don't believe I know you-"
"Aw," Denny said, "go suck on my dick ... " and started away.
"Hey, I was kidding ... " l.anya called, amused puzzlement at
Denny in her voice. Her waist tugged in Kids arm.
Denny turned, his face flickering in the passing lights. As they
caught up to him, he grinned. "I wasn't." He put his arm around her
too.
They stepped up on the next corner, watching the jogging luminosities, delicate or bulbous, pass beneath charred branches, under
598 Dhalgren
lamp posts suspending inverted crOwns of broken glass, by houses
with columned porches, mtrances gaping on blackness, as if the occupants had rushed out to see, then fled back in too distracted a state
to close the doors behind.
Blocks later that image, still working in Kid's mind, finally loos_
ened a chuckle which rolled around in his mouth.
umya and Denny were looking at him, she with a smile anticipating explanation, he merely without comprehension. Kid pulled her
tighter. Dennys fringe brushed his arm, then crushed against him as
he lowered his own arm down her back. Her far hip, moving under
Kid's fmgers, did not change its rhythm.
"Ihis is .II very .colorful." Madame Brown strained back on the
leash. "But it's quite a walk. Muriel, heel!"
"Roger's friends are pretty colorful too," Lanya said. "He'll rise to
the occasion.. II
Vines climbed the wall. Willow boughs hung over it, sawtooth
shadows growing and shrinking as the red, orange, and green lights
passed.
"We're just about there, ain't we?" Nightmare called from the middle of the street. Insects and arthropods floaled around him, laughing
gigantically.
"Yeah!" Kid called. "The gates up there."
[)ermy was fingering in his shirt pocket. "Now what am I supposed to do with this thing?"
"Once we get inside," Lanya explained, "just turn me on. Every
once in a while, give a look and if what you see is too dull, fiddle with
those knobs tUI something interesting happens. Tak says its tange is
fifty yards, so don't get too far away. Otherwise I go out."
Suddenly Kid pulled away to shoulder through the bright, boisterous crowd. On a wmm's srutter, he thumbed his shield's pip: it
clicked.
From the inside, he remembered, your shield is invisible. But people
had cleared around him. (I don't know what 1 am.) He looked down at
the cracked pavement. (But whateVer it is, it's blue.) The halo moved
with him across the concrete.
Three beside him turned olhheir lights, growing shadows before
them from the lights behind.
It's like a game (there were the stone newels), not knowing who,
Or what, you are. He wondered how long before he would finally get
someone aside and ask. And flipped his pip to kill the temptation.
Palimpsest 599
Stepping ahead of the crowd, he grabbed the bars. The others
massed loudly around. He wondered, as he slared in at the pines, li t
clumsily and shiftingly by his bright entourage, what to call out.
"Hello!' A young-Filipino? (probably)-in a green turtleneck
and sports jacket stepped up. "You're the Kid? I thought so. I'm Barry
Lansang. I'm on the gate tOnight. Just a second, I'll let you all in."
"'Hey; we're here!"
"How we gonna get in?7.I
"Shut up! He's lettin' us in now. n
"ThiS here's where we going?'
Lansang stepped aside. The gate went Clang, and the noise level
around Kid cut by two-thirds.
Lansang swung back the bars.
Kid stepped forward, aware that the others had not.
"Go on up," Lansang smiled. "They're all expecting you. Is this
your whole party?'
"Yeah. !think so."
"If you expect anybody else to come by later, just leave their
names with me and rll make a note."
"Naw. This is it."
Lansang smiled again. "Well, if stragglers come along later and we
do have an identification problem, I can always go up and find you.
Come on in," thiS last over Kid's shoulder, accompanied by a gesture.
Kid looked back.
The gateway crowded with silent, fa·miliar faces.
"Come on,ll Kid said.
Then they came.
Dragon Lady was among the firsl. "This is something, huh?'
'Yeah: Kid said. "And this is just the trees.'
"Follow the driveway up," Lansang instructed. He was, Kid saw,
enjoying himself.
Lanya joined Kid; her gOwn blushed pink. As they walked together, robins-egg droplets grew into puddles which swelled to oceans.
• Am I doing this right?' Dermy reached under hiS vest into his
shirt pocket with a black and glittering arm.
u.nya looked down at herself. "I think the other knob-the one
on the front-is for the color intensity. Leave it like this for now. We
don't want to shoot it all on the entrance."
Ploodlights between the huge pines lit the gravel and, after the
night journey; made them squint.
600 Dhalgren
"Here we are," Madame Brown said, looking off between two trees
where one light was not working. "All safe and sound."
Muriel walked close to her.
"WhereS everybody likely to be?" Kid asked Lanya, whose dress
dribbled a metallic green aCross her left breast.
"Out on the terraCe gardens. Where we were that afternoon with
MrNewboy."
Kid did not remember the driveway as this long. "How come they
have all this electricity?"
"When it's all working, they can get this whole grounds practically
bright as day," umya said.
They passed the last trees:
The house was bright as day against the night.
"Newboy said something about lanterns . . . "
"It doesn't all work inside," Lanya said. "There was one whole
wing where there wasn't a socket functioning." (Some dozens of men
and women along the stone terrace turned to look.) "But whenever
Roger lights the whole place up like this, I get the feeling I'm watching
some really banal Son et lumiere."
.The scorpions qUieted as they saw the other guests.
Suit, shirt, and lie of different blues, one pushed from among
them. Short blond hair, a serious expression, he was followed by twa
women-the older also in blue, hair rinsed the same shade as his
shirt. The younger, in a floor-length brocade, looked unhappy.
Calkins, Kid thought starting forward. But anticipation had betrayed him: It was Captain Kamp.
"Kid-!" called out affably enough-"you got here. And these are
your friends ... 1 ... um. Well, we've had a little ... " Initial affability
spent, Kamp looked confused. "Now, Roger hasn't gotten back yet.
He told us he might be late, and t(} tell you how sorry he was ... He
asked me and Thelma-" he nodded at the woman in brocade-"and
Ernesline-" and at the woman in blue-"tosay hello for him when
you got here .•. urn, since I'd met you-" his eyes kept moving to
the people behind Kid- "to introduce you around and things. Now,
Ernestine, this is the Kid. And this is Thelma .•• "
Ernestine, who seemed much less nervous than Kamp, said, "I'm
Ernestine Throckmorton. How wonderful to have dl you young people here. Hi, love," which was. special nod to Lanya, who grinned
back. "Now I think the only thing to do is plunge in and go over how
everything is laid out. Why don't you all come with us and we'll
Palimpsest 601
show you where to get something to eat and drink ... ? Come on,
now." She turned and motioned them up the steps onto the terrace.
As the other guests stepped back, staring, she went for the two
nearest and brightest scorpions. "And what are your names?"
Nightmare said rather like a question.
"And your friend?"
"Oh, yeah. I'm sorry. This here is Dragon Lady."
"Very pleased to meet you both. You know, I've heard your
names before; well, read them actually, in the paper. Really, I'm
quite terrified."
Kid glanced over.
Ernestine, who did not look terrified one bit, strolled by the staring (some smiled) guests, Nightmare on one arm, Dragon Lady on
the other.
"Bill!" she cried out. (Bill was smiling.) "Come here, dear."
Bill, a tall, handsome man, perhaps thirty-eight, in a black turtleneck, a can of beer in one hand (the only guest there already, without
"jacket), fell in beside them. "Bill, this is Nightmare and Dragon
lady. You mentioned them in that article you did for Roger a little
while ago .. Now, have you ever met them?"
qI'm afraid 1 haven't."
'Well, here they are.»
"Hello,' and "Hello," Nightmare and Dragon Lady said, just out of
sync.
"I'm glad to meet you, but I'm not sure that you're glad to meet me
after some of the things I said."
"You wrote an article?" Nightmare asked. "In the paper?"
"I didn't read no article," Dragon Lady s:tid.
"Probably all. just as well, considering some of what I put downhere, we're all heading for the beer wagon down at the end-" Bill
gestured with his can. "I'm really surprised to meet you here with the
Kid. I was under the impression that the various gangs-nests- kept
at each other's throats."
"Naw," Nightmare said.. uNaw; it ain't like that ... n
While Nightmare explained how it was, Kid looked over again.
Bill had replaced Ernestine, who had drifted back to other scorpions:
"I'm Ernestine Throckmorton. And you're ... ?"
Lanya smiled and Whispered: "This is going to be work." Concern
underlay the smile.
"Huh?"
602 Dhalgren
"Since Roger's not here. To get people mixing. 1 mean if he's gOt
one, that's his single overwhelming talent. Ernestine's competent. I've
seen her work before-»
"r guess you know her.'
"r recognize about five people here, 1 think. Thank God. RO"ger
usudly keeps a pretty inspired group. Ernestine can even be brilliant.
Roger, however, bas genius. And! I'm afraid I was sort of counting on
it this evening. Don't be mad if 1 abandon you for a little while. You
can take care of yourself. Why don't you start by introducing me to
the Captain?" .
"Oh," Kid said. "Sure. 1 know him. Glass and I walked him up
here one night.'
"Glass ... " she considered, and her consideration made him pauSe
till she nodded:
"Captain Kamp?." he had to say three times before the Captain
turned. "This is my friend, Lanya Colson. "
"Shlce everyones talking to people they've read about in the pa.
pers," Lanya said, "I guess I can tell you that I've read about you."
·Um . .. ' The Captain smiled uncertainly.
"I spent some time here with Roger a litde while ago," '-:anya said,
which to Kid sounded pretty phony.
But the Captain's "Oh?" was filled with relief.
She seemed to know what she was doing.
·Where has Roger gone? It's not like him to arrange something
like this and then not be here."
"Now I'm sure he'll be back," the Captain said. "I'm just sure. He
had it all arranged with the lady in the kitchen-'
"MrsAlt?"
"-yes. And she's really laid out a nice spread.l don't know where
he went off to. I was sort of hoping he'd be back in time. Partying
isn't really my strong point. And 1 didn't realize aU of you people
were going to come. Of course, Roger did say bring twenty or thirty
friends, didn't he? But. Now. Well .. ."
The long terrace ended at a patio.
Two tables, Were set up on the stone flags.
Flame blued the copper bottoms of a half-dozen chafing dishes.
There were paper plates. There were plastic forks. The napkins
wereUnen.
Most of the guests, before on the terrace, had now dr.fted with
them to the patio.
, Palimpsest 603
"You just help yourselves to anything you'd like to eat.' Ernestine's arms rose like a conductor's. "That's the bar over there. Either
of these gendemen-" one young black bartender, one elderly white
one, both in double-breasted blue-"will get you a drink. Those two
kegs over there are beer. If you want it in the can, the cooler, here-"
she thumbed at it; two people laughed- "is chock-full." In more
modulated tones to whoever happened to be beside her: "Would you
like something to eat?"
"Sure." Revelation said.
"Yes, ma'am," from Spider.
No full meal had been cooked in the nest that day.
"Captain Kamp," Lanya was saying, "tbis is Glass. Glass, this is
Captain Kamp."
"Oh. yes. We've met, now. t1
"You have?" Lanya's surprise sounded perfectly delighted and perfectly sincere. (If I wrote her words down, Kid thought, what she's
saying would vanish into something meaningless as the literal record
of the sounds June or George makes.) "Then I can leave the two of
you alone and get something to eat," and turned away.
("Now," Karnp said. ·Well. What have you been doing since I saw
you last?"
(Glass said: "Nothing. You been doing anything?"
(Kamp said: "No, not really.")
Lanya shouldered through Tarzan-and-the apes. "Hey, come on
with me, I want you to meet Someone. No, really. come ont nand
emerged with Jack the Ripper and Raven, herding before them the
diminutive black Angel. "Dr Wellman, you're from Chicago! I'd like
you to meet Angel, the Ripper, and Raven." She stayed a little longer
with them. Kid listened to the conversation start, halt, and finally
settle into even exchanges (between Angel and Dr Wellman at any
rate) about community centers in Chicago, which Angel seemed to
think were "all right, man. Yeah I really liked that," while Dr Wellman held out, affably, that "they weren't very well organized. At least
not the ones we did our reports on.»
"Hey, Kid."
Kid turned.
Paul Fenster bobbed a paper plate at him.
"Oh, hi ... !. Kid grinned, astonished how happy he was to see
someone he knew.
"Get yourself something to eat, why don't you?" Fenster said and
6Qf Dhalgren
stepped away between two 0 thers, while Kid held the words he'd
been abo"'t to say clumsily in his mouth.
He wished that Tak had Come. And that Fenster had not.
Lanya passed close enough to smile at him. And he was close
enough to hear her coax Madame Brown: "Work, work, work!" in a
whisper.
·Wrapping herself in her leash, Madame Brown turned and said:
"Siam,this is a terribly good friend of mine, Everett Forest. Siam was
my patient, Everett."
Everett was the man Kid usually saw at Teddys in purple angora.
TOnight he wore a navy blazer and grey knitted pants.
Somewhere across the patio, Lanya was holding paper plates in
both hands, about to give them away. Turquoise billowed about her
silver hem, trying and failing to rise like a lazy lava lamp. He started
to go take a plate, but suddenly thought of Denny. looked around for
him-
"1 asked Roger if I could be on--"
Kid turned.
"-on your welcoming committee-" (=happy Thelma of the
floor-length brocade)- "because I didn't think I could pOSSibly get to
speak to you otherwise. I wanted to tell you how much pleasure
Brass Orchids gave me. Only now I-find that i1's-' her dark eyes,
still unhappy, fen and rose- "juS! very difficult to do."
"Urn •.. thank you," Kid offered.
hard to compliment a poet. If you say his work seems skill_
ful, he turns around and explains that all he's interested in is vigor
and spontaneity. If you say the work has life and immediacy; it turns
out he Was basically concerned with overcoming some technical
problem." She sighed. "r really enjoyed them. And outside a few polite phrases, there just isn't the vocabulary to describe that sort of
enjoyment in a way that sounds real." She paused. "And your poems
are one of th. realest things thats happened to me ina long time."
"Damn!" Kid said. "Thank you!·
"Would you like something to drink?" she suggested in the silence.
"Yeah. Sure. Let's get something to drink."
They walked to the ,table..
"I've written-and published-two novels,' Thelma went on.
"Nothing you're likely to have heard of. But the effect of your poems
On me, especially the first four, thi: Elegy. and the last two before the
Palimpsest 605
long conversational one in meter, is rather the effect I'd always hoped
my books would have on people.· She actually laughed. "In a way.
your book was discouraging, because watching your pOems gain that
effect showed me some of the reasons why my prose often doesn't.
That condensed and clear descriptive insight is something I envy
you. And you wield it as naturally as speech, turning it on this and
that and the other ... " She shook her head, she smiled. "All I can do
is find a lot of adjectives that you've got to fill up with meaning for
yourself: Beautiful, perhaps marvelous, or wonderful ... "
Kid decided they all applied, to her anyway; his delight was awesome. But holding it (the black bartender poured him a bourbon) was
an entrancing irritation as pleasurable in building as a sneeze in relief.
Denny stepped up to the table, fingering inside his shirt pocket. "Hey, you wanna see something?U
Kid and Thelma watched.
And across the patio, Lanyas dress splashed around with orange
and gold. The people she was talking with stepped back in surprise.
She looked down at herself, laughed, searched about till she saw Kid
and Denny. and blew them a kiss.
Thelma smiled and did not seem to understand.
Kid introduced Thelma to Denny. She introduced them to someone else. Bill, the reporter, joined them. Thelma left. Kid watched
laddering relational torques and tensions, already interpreting them
as likes, dislikes, ease and unease. Lanya brought Budgie Goldstein to
meet him. Budgie, immense in green chiffon, explained how frightened she'd always been of scorpions but now how nice they all
seemed, punctuating her explanation with sharp, short laughs. They
had wandered from the terrace onto ,the-
"These? I believe these are ... Toby; what are these?"
"The September Gardens, Roxanne. September, remember ... And
who is this young manl You wouldn't be the Kid?"
And he was handed on.
He liked it.
It took half an hour to realize he had been kept entirely away from the other scorpions.
Besides what he estimated at two dozen house guests, there were
another thirty·odd invited from town, including Paul Fenster, Everett
(Angora) Forest, and (Kid was surprised to see him leaning over
against the stone wall, talking with Revelation) Frank.
There was a bridge betweenJanuary and June.
606 Dhalgren
Kid looked over the rail at weI rock; floodlights glistened on a
vein of clotted leaves-there was no clear water. Uinya and Ernestine
passed on the little path underneath.
Ernestine said into her drink: "The only thing I could think of to
do was to phYSically push them at one another ... "
Kid thought umya had not seen bim, but a moment after she vanished she said, "Hello,· behind him..
He turned from the rail "You've been very busy."
Wrist against forehead, she mimed distress. "Phase one, at any
rate, is over. JUSt about everyone knows now it's posSible to talk to
everyone else. Are you having a good time?"
"Yeah. They're all here for me." Then he grinned. "But they're all
talking about you."
"Huh?'"
"Three people have told me how great your dress is," which was
true. "Denny's doing a good job,"
"You're a doll!" She clapped his cheeks between her palms and
kissed him all the nose.
Catkedral, California, and Thruppence ambled below them on the
path, light and dark shoulders together. 1 feel responsible for them,
he thought, recalling her initial efforlS. He laughed.
Her dress began to broil with green and lavender.
She saw and asked, "Where's Denny gotten off to? Lets go look for
hi m. "
They did and could not find him, spoke to others, and then Kid
lost her again.
From the high rocks of-"October," said the plaque on the rustringed birdbath-he looked down toward the terrace.
Two women he had not met, with BU! (whom he had) between them,
had cornered Baby and were talking at him intently. Baby smiled very
hard, his paper plate just under his chin. Sometimes he dropped his head
to nod, sometimes to scrape up another and another forkful. Once in a
while someone across the terrace, when they were sure they were unobserved, would glance-two ladies, one .rter anolher, maneuvered for
the better view, noticed they were observed, and walked away.
Someone was in the bushes behind him.
Kid looked around: Jack the Ripper backed out; from the movement of his elbows, he was closing his fly. He turned. "Huh? ..• oh,
it's just you, man." He grinned, bent, adjusted hintself. "Scared somebody gonna see me back there takin' a leak."
Palimpsest 607
"There:. a bathroom in the house somewhere."
"Shit. I didn't wanna go askin' around for that. My piss ain't gonna
kill no flowers. This is a real nice place, huh. A real nice party. Everybody's real nice. You havin' a nice time? I sure am."
Kid nodded. 'You catch Baby when he came in?"
"No," Ihe Ripper drawled with a wildly interrogative cadence.
"You said you wanted to see what the reaction was. 1 missed it. 1
was wondering if you caught it."
"God damn!" The Ripper snapped his fingers. "You know 1 wasn't
even looking?"
"There he is. H
"Where?H
Kid nodded toward the terrace.
The Ripper stuck his hands in the back' of his pants. "What they
talkin' about?1I
Kid shrugged.
"Hey, man!" The Ripper's hands came loose again. "I gotta go
down and hear this." He grinned at Kid who started to say something. But the Ripper was off along the rocks.
Atlhe. four-foot terrace waD, the Ripper straight.armed up, scrambled over-half a dozen looked-and jumped. A bopping lope took
him to the bar. The white bartender gave him two drinks. He came to
the corner, thrust one glass at Baby and said loud enough for Kid to
hear: "Now 1 know you want a drink, Baby, 'cause you gonna need
something to keep you warm."
Several people laughed.
Baby took the drink in both hands-he had put his plate down On
the waH-and looked as though he were about to dive into it. But Bill
and the two women merely made room, and continued.
Seconds later, the Ripper, aU weight on one leg, heavy lower lip
sucked in and long head quizzically cocked, stood rapt, nodding in
unison with Baby.
Curious at their low converse, Kid walked away from it into
MaIek.
Only one light worked here, anchored high and harsh on an elm.
Captain Kamp stood silhouetted at the vertex of his shadow. "Hello,
now, 1 was just earning back this way ... you enjoying yourself?"
Backlight made. him ominous; his voice was eheerful. ".r was just over
there taking a_a (Kid expected him to say "Ieak")-"Iookin the Augost gardens. There're no lights in there, so I guess people are staying
608 Dhalgren
clear. But you can see down into the city. A rew street lights are still
on. I'm not too good at this ersatz host business. And this party takes
some hosting.« Karop stepped up. Kid turned to walk wLth him.
"Now I sure wish Roger would get here.«
"Doesn't look like anyone's missed him too much."
"I have. I'm just not used to all ,this ... well, sort of thing. I mean,
trying to be in charge of it."
"I guess I'd like to meet him.«
"Sure. Of course you would." Kamp nodded as they came nearer
the house. "I mean he's giving this party for you, for your book.
You'd think he'd ... but now I'm pretty sure he'll get here. You don't
worry now." .
"I'm not and don't mean to start."
"You know I was thinking-' they walked up the stone steps-
"about some of the things we were talking about when I first met you.'
"That was a strange evening. But it came after a strange day."
"Sure did. Have you seen Rogers observatory?" Kamp interrupted
himself. "Perhaps you'd like to go up and see it."
Kid was curious at the transition rather than the suggestion. "Okay."
Coming down the terrace, Lady of Spain, Spider, Angel, Raven and
Tanan, circled gangling D·t:
ItD_t, man, you gotta see this! D
"I ain't never seen no garden like this befOre. All them flowers-"
"-and a big fountain that works and all."
"Come on. We gonna show you." Lady of Spain togged.his arm.
"D .. t, you ainl t never seen no garden as pretty as this in. yOU:l'
whole life!'
"I guess-" Kamp opened the door for Kid-"I'mjust not used to
it. I mean all these different .. . kinds of people. Like that boy back
there walking around with no clothes on? And everybody going on
just like there was nothing wrong." The large, dark room was Ih •• d
with books. In candlelight some dozen people sat on the floor or on
hassocks. Several looked up from a tape recorder from which organ
music flowed. One man (Kid remembered his making some joke in
November about the smoke) said, "Kid? Captain? Would you like to
join us? We were just listening to some-"
'We're going to the observatory." Kamp opened another door.
The organ piece ended; after a slight pause, a long note bent. Then
another ... They were playing "Difliraction."
Kid smiled as he walked after Karol' down a hall nearly black. He
Palimpsest 609
could hear Lanya's whistle. At the top of a stairway Kid saw faint
light. The carpeting was thick and so warm under his bare foot he
wondered if there were heating on.
"I suppose it wouldn't be so bad if Roger was here. But being left
in charge of a party for a bunch of people tltat, frankly, I'd put out of
my house ... "
Kid was qUietly amazed and wondered what Kamp was thinking in
the pause.
" ... I just don't know what to do. Do you know what I mean?"
Anything, Kid thought, I say will sound angry and stupid. He said,
'Sure," and followed Kamp up the stairs.
"A few months ago, n Kamp said, "I was in some experiments.
They didn't have anything to do with the moOn. In fact I had 10 get a
special release from ,the Space Program to participate. Some students
of a friend of mine at Michigan were running tests, and I guess he
thought it would be a feather in his cap 10 get me for a guinea pig.
Now, it'd been so long since I had anything to dotltat wasn't in some
way connected with the Program, I went along with it. They were experimentson sensory deprivation and overload." At the head of the
steps, Kamp waited for Kid before starting up a third flight.
He led Kid across a brick floor to a double doorway.
'" was in the overload part. It was all pretty amateurish, actually."
Kid stepped onto what first seemed a semi-circular balcony.
Fainlly, below, a Toom full of people began to clap in time to the
music ........
"I guess they'd all been reading 100 many articles on LSD-"
-and shouted.
"-1 took LSD back in the late fifties-more tests, that this psychiatrist friend of mine was running. But I've always been a little ahead of
what's going on. Anyway, I know what it's like, LSD. And I'm pretty sure
most of those kids setting up those experiments in Michigan didn't."
The terrace was enclosed in a glass dome. In the center was a sixfoot in diameter celestial globe of clear plastic. Light from the garden
below struggled in the smoke above, glowing like dilute milk.
"Now 1 guess you've taken LSD and all that stoff. n
"Sure."
"Well, all they'd been doing was looking at all the pretty pictures
everyone had been drawing." Kamp touched the globe, removed his
fingers. Aries passed across Libra. The stars were gliuering stones sel
in the etched constellations. "They had spherical rear-projection
610 Dhalgrtn
roolllS, practicaDy as big as this place here. They could cover it With
colors and shapes and flashes. They put earphones on me and blasted in beeps and clicks and oscillating frequencies. Anyway, I was
supposed to pid< out patterns from all this. Later I learned Ihat mine
was the control group: We Were given no patterns at all. I was told
all the ones I had seen I had itnposed myself ... But after twe> hours
of two hours of fillips and Clirlicues of light and noise, when
I went outside, into the real world, I was just astounded at how ...
rich and complicated everything suddenly looked and sounded: 'Ihe
textures of concrete, tree bark, grass, the shadings from sky to cloud.
But rich in comparison to the: sensory-overload chamber. Rich . ..
and I suddenly realized what the kids had been calling a sensory
overload was really information-deprivatioo. It's the pattern that colors and shapes assume that tell you whether itS a cow or a car you're
looking at. It's the very finest alternatioDS in color differentiation over
a surface that tel! you whether it's maple or pine, styrene or polyethylene, linen or flannel. Take any view in front of you and cut alI the: top
and bottom tiU you've only got an iRch-wicje strip and you'll still he
amazed at all the Information you can get from just running your eye
along that. Well, all this started Ille thinking bad< to the moon. Because that had been a place-and it happened in every mile en
route-where standard information patterns just broke down. And
yet, something we haven't been able to talk about-to anyonesince we got bad<. We'd trained for prolonged free-fal! by spending
time underwater in diving suits. I remember when we actually hit
suslained weighdessness, I broadcast bad<, 'Hey, it's just tike being
underwater!' and yet as I said that into the chin mike, I was thinking:
You certainly could never mislah. the two conditions for one another.
But 1 couldn't think of any way to say what was different about it, so I
just described it the way everybody. who'd never been there themselves, had lold me it was going to feel like. Later i thought, thatlllike
telling someone the world is flat and sending him off to the edge; but
because he doesn't know quite how to describe such. gentle roundness, he mumbles and stammers and says, 'Well yeah, I was at the •• _
edge.' ABd the thing aboul the mOOR itself, the one thing I've really
told anybooy, because I don'l think I would have known how
before those experiments: it's anotber world, and when you're there,
you have no way of knOwing what anything means. Physically. That
whole landscape tells you nothing about itself, on any level, in the
way that the most desolate stretch of sand on earth ,tells you about
Palimpsest 611
winds that have blown over it, rains that have or have not fallen, or
the feel it might have beneath your feet if you walked across it. 'An
airless, waterless void . . .' the way they say in all the science-fiction
stories? No, that refers to some desert on earth, or what space between the stars looks like when you're safely tucked under the atmOSphere. The moon is a different world, with a different order that
you don't understand There that richness-not because it isn't
in bright colors, or because it's al! brown, purple, and grey. It's because you run your eyes over ,the rocks and dirt, you have no way to
know what the tiny alterations in color mean. Even though it has a
horizon and perspective, and ... weI!, rocks and dirt, it's more like
being in that sensory-overload cltamber than anything else. And of
course, it isn't like that at aIL It wasn't horrible. Horror stiU has
something to do with Earth. I suppose it was frightening. But even
rbat was absorbed in the excitement ofit. 1-' he paused- "do not
know how to tell you about it.' He smiled and shrugged. "And that's
probably the one thing I reaUy haven't told anybody before. Oh, I've
said, 'You can't describe it. You'd have to be there.' But that's my first
wife telling h.er mother-in-law about the rime we went to Persia. And
that isn't what" mean. J)
Kid smiled back and wished he hadn't.
It isn't his moon I distrust so much, he thought, as it is that first
wife in Persia. "I understand,' he said, "as much as l'U let myself.'
"Maybe," Kamp said after a moment, "you do. Let's go back down
to the party.'
Walking down the steps, Kid felt self-betrayed and wondered if
there were any benefit from the feeling. He wanted to find umya and
Denny.
Outside on the terrace, while the Captain, beside hitn, looked
around as if for someone else to talk to, Kid thought: I feel the responSibility for hitn now he probably hoped 1 felt the night I walked
him up here. That is not right, and I don't like it.
Ernestine Throckmorton said, "Captain! Kid! Ab, there you are,"
and began to talk definitely only to Kamp.
Kid excused hitnself, wondering whether she really was an angel,
and went down into the gardens.
Lanya was crossing the bridge in a fury of emerald and indigo.
UiHey," he said. "Have you seen Denny?1J
She turned. ·You haven't. He's feeling abandoned.'
Paul Fenster, holding his drink benealh his chin, stopped around
612 Dhalgren
Kid and said: "Jesus Christ, you'.1 never believe what was going on
back tbere in April I didIt t think I was going to be able to make it.'
He laughed.
unya didrrt, and asked, "What?"
"A whole bunch of black kids, back in April, they've got this whole
Toutine worked out. They've gotlhis white boy, called Tarzan: And
they were just performing! And of course Roger's nice old colonel
from Alabama was there-the one I was teHing you about who gave
me so much trouble when I was visiting-and of coUrse he was
laughing harder than anybody else. I kid you not, they were Swinging
from the God-damn trees!"
"What did you do?" unya had begun to laugh.
"Sweated a lot," Fenster said. "And tried w think of some way to
leave. You know; guys who come to parties like this in berets and talk
about liberating the furniture: Now I'm pretty into that. But I guess
that type all had sense enough to get out of llellona while there was
some getting. This Stepin Fetchit stuff, though-well, all i <:an say is,
it's been a while!"
"Suffering's supposed {O be good for the something-or-olher," Kid
said.
"It damn," Fenster replied, "well better be!" He grunted (simianly?)
and walked on across Ihe bridge.
unya took Kid's hand. ", .. Denny?"
"Yeah.u
"I just left him." Her dress was shimmering black. A silver circle
rose on the hem. 4}n March." She gestured with her head.
He said, "You're beauliful."
He thought, she's wistful.
"Thank you. You really like the dress?"
He nodded, kept nodding, and suddenly she laughed and closed
his mOl;lth with her fmgers.
"I believe you. But I was beginning to think it was too much. or
conp;e I was expecting just to stand around in some elegantly arbored
corner holding court; not run around working. Where, I woad.r, is
Roger?"
Kid held ber cool hands against his face with his warm ones. "Let$
find Denny."
Pawn broke on her waist. "You find him." she said. "I'll see you a
little later." A scarlet sun, haloed in yellow; eclipsed the silver moon.
He wondeIed why but said, "Okay," and left heron the bridge.
Palimpsest 613
The stream became a pool in March, scaled with immobile leaves.
"I told that bitch!" Dollar stood and rocked on bowed legs. "I told
that bitch. After what she tried, you know? I just lold her."
Denny sat cross-legged on the stone bench and didn't look like he
was listening too hard.
Kid walked around Ihe pool. "You trying to get in trouble at my
party?"
Dollar's head jerked: he looked scared.
Denny said, "Dollar's okay. He ain't done nothing."
"I ain't done nothing.H Dollar echoed. lilts a· real nice party,' Kid."
Kid put his hand on the back of Dollar's pitted neck and squeezed.
"You have a good time. Don't let anything get you, you know? You got
a whole lot of space to walk around in. Something gets you here, you
walk on over there. Something gets you there, you go on someplace
else. If it happens a third time, come tell me about it. Understand?
There's no strange sun in the sky tonight."
"Nothing's wrong, Kid. Everylhing's okay." The distressful smile
went; DoDar just looked sad. "ReaDy."
"Good." Kid leI go Dollar's neck and looked at Denny. "You having
a good time?"
"I guess so." Denny's shirt, unbuttoned. hung out of his pants.
"Yeah."
A group came through the ivied gate, scorpions and others, follOwing Ernestine Throckmorton.
Dollar said, "Oh, hey!" and jogged, jangling, after them, around
the pool and out another entrance.
"I'm going to take this off." Denny shrugged from his vest, got the
control box from his pocket, slipped out of his shirt, and sat, turning
the box in One hand, the olher slung among his chains. "unya says
I've been doing a good job. This little thing is something, huh?"
Kid sat down and put his hand on Denny's dry, knobby back. In
the boy's glance some relief flickered.
Kid rubbed his back.
Denny said, "Why you doin' that?" But he was smiling at his lap.
"Because you like it" Kid moved his hand up Ihe sharp shoulder
blade and down, pressing. Denny rocked with each rub.
1'1 Umya said and Kid turned, O} envy you two."
Kid did not stop rubbing and Denny did not look up.
'Why?" Denny moved his shoulders, reached up to scratch his
neck.
614 Dhalgren
"I don't knOw. I supposed its because you can let people-let Kid
know you want things I'd be afraid to ask for."
·You want your back rubbed?" Kid asked.
"Yes.' She grinned. "But not now.'
"I watch the two of you," Kid said, "when you're playing. When
you're throwing things at one another: tugging one another around
all the time. I envy you."
"You ... ?" !.anya reached for Dennys shoulder.
But Denny suddenly stood and stepped forward.
Kid wondered if he'd seen her reaching, watched her face pass
,through hUrt and her hand withdraw.
, Denny turned on the pool edge and laughed. "Aw, you two are
all_a He twisted a knob.
From neck to hem she glittered black; black granulated silver;
scarlet poured about her. "Hey. see, I got it good!"
"'You sure do,:It LaJlya said.
Kid stood and took her arm. "Come on.'
"'Where are we ... ?"
Kid grinned: "Come onl"
She raised a brow and came, intendy curious.
followed them; his confusion looked much less sharp tRan
hers.
On the other side of the ivied stone, Ernestine apostrophized:
" ... chunk crab meat, not the stringy kind! Then eggs. Then a few
bread crumbs. And bay seasoning. When I lived in Trenton, I'd have
to have it sent up from Maryland. But Mrs Alt-nobody could have
been more surprised than I was-found an entire shelf full in a store
down on Temple ... "
At ,the silent edge, Dollar muttered re'Verently: " ... God damn . .. '
"Bay seasoning," Ernestine reiterated as Kid and !.anya and Denny
passed around her, "is the most important thing."
On the path the next garden, Denny whispered: "Where are we
going?D
"Through here," Kid said "The lights are oulin here .. ."
... August," Lmya said.
They stepped into flaky darkness. Grass slid cool between Kid;s
toes. He clutched; it slipped away With the next step; tickling again.
The next step was surprising stone.
He rocked his naked foot: Wet, cold ... rough. His shod one
stayed seeady.
Palimpsest 615
"I think tberes a-' Lanya's voice echoed. Sbe paused to listen to
the reverberations- sort of underpass."
Tbey came from under it four steps later.
"I didn't even see us go in." Denny stepped forward in tbe night
grass.
Kid curled his free toes again, lifted his foot; grass tore.
"Hey. you can see the city. almost," Denny said.
,Beyond a ruffed, stone beast, blurs of light were Snipped off across
the bottom by buildings. Implied hills, slopes, or depressions patterned the darkness around.
"Calkins' place can soak up a lot of people," The high trees-like
sman cypresses-were carbon dark against tbe muzzy night. Kid
tried to see down into Bellona. One tall ... bUilding? It had perhaps a
dozen windows lit.
"How odd," Lanya said. "All the limits go, and you can't believe
theres reaUy any more to it. We're used to objects like icebergs or oil
wells wbere you kROW most of it is under ground or water. But
something like a city at nigh(, with great stretches of it blotted or
obscured, that;; a very dillerent-»
"You guys," Denny interrupted. "I don't envy you ... I guess. But
you two caR talk aoout things that, you know, are just so far beyond
me I don't even know how to ask questions sometimes. I listen. But
Sometimes when I don't understand-or even when I do, I just
wanna fuckin' cry, you know?" When they were silent, he asked
again, "You know?»
Lany. nodded. "r do."
Denny breathed out and looked.
They stood apart and felt very close.
Kid watched her dress catch what light there was and glitter dim
crimson. with waves of navy. or a green of the eVening ocean.
"What's that?" Denny asked.
Kid looked beyond them. "A fire."
"Where do you think it is?" Lany. asked.
"I can't tell. I don'treallylrnow wbere we are." He stepped up and
put his hand on her sboulder: The melallic cloth prickled. Her skin
was cool.
Dennys, under his other hand, was fever hot and, as usual, paper
dry.
Kid wanted to walk.
So they walked with him, a hip on either bip, hitting to different
616 Dhalgren
rhythms. He'd slipped his liands across their backs to their OUter
shoulders. The hand on Lanya's shoulder was still.
Denny put his arm around Kid's back.
Lanya's arms were folded, her vision distanced while she walked
and watched the charred city.
Then she put her head on his shoulder (still watching), her arlll
around him, her shoulder more firmly in the place beneath his arm
brought her thigh against his '
And was still watching.
They walked beside the waist-high wall. This is the largest garden
Kid thought. Denny shifted his step- ,
"What?" Kid asked.
"One of that ain't working ... " Denny had just
stepped around it.
They crossed cool flags.
Leaves rasped away the silence. A breeze? While he walked beneath the loud, black fleece of some high elm or oak, he waited for
the warlll or cool gust. Silence returned; he'd felt neither.
"Why don't it ever burn up here?" Denny asked, too softly. too intently. His shoulder twitched m Kid's hand. "Why don't it just all
burn up or something, the whole thing? It just goes On and ... ' Kid
ceased to knead, rubbed now.
Denny took another deep breath, fast, then let it out over the next
five steps.
Lanya turned on Kid's shoulder, glanced across at Denny. and
turned back.
Kid tried to loosen the tension in his abdomen. There was a sudden,
unsettling feel: All his organs, gut, liver, belly, lungs and heart,
seemed to have shifted inches down. He didn't break step, but .the
feeling passedtbrough a moment of nausea that ended with his
breaking wind.
Which felt better.
He pulled Lanya closer; the leg agaiost his leg and the shoulder's
tugging eased into Kid's and Lanyals rhythm. Translated through Kid's
body. Denny!; motion firmed and, to the tension, Kid's firmed too.
She Sighed with her mouth just slightly open, COrner to corner,then
stroked his arm with the back of her neck. Denny's hand slipped its
knuckly padding between Kid's hip and hers.
Another stone lion crouched on the wall, staring.
By it, with leafless branches like shatter lines On the night's
Palimpsest 617
smoked glass, was a tree. Beneath Kid's foot the ground was bare,
crumbly and-ashy? Recognizing the texture, he stepped from the
charred grass to fresh.
They circled the garden.
It was too dark to tell if the small pool were full or empty. Lanya
put her hand out and touched a tree trunk. She nO longer watched
the small burnings worm down in the night city. She walked more
closely in step with I(id than Denny did. (Kid thinking: It frees her to
think of things further away.) He felt protective of her meditations,
and frightened by them.
A memory of rustling italicized the silence.
Kid listened for converse in another garden. Their own footsteps
were so quiet.
Beyond the wall (miles away?) things smoked and flickered.
A whisper: "Someone's coming-In
And another: "Oh, wait a minute. Watch out-I"
. Kid recoguized one girl's voice but not the other.
One branch among the bushes beat at the rest.
The guy who stepped out, zipping his fly. belt loose down both
hips, and grinning ... it was Glass. "Oh," he said. "!t's you all," and
pulled his belt through the buckle.
One of the girls said: "Just a second. Here it is ... "
"Can you see anything?" the other asked, then giggled-the girl
in maroon jeans who had come with them from the nest: She pushed
out between the brush.
Somebody behind her waS looking all around: that was Spitt.
.he other girl Kid first recognized as one of Roger's guests. Even
in the three-quarter dark she looked rumpled. The second recognition was that it was Milly: Her red hair fell over a dark, velvet jumper.
She wore something metallic beneath it, unbuttoned now. Copperhead, a hand on each of her shoulders, guided her out.
Lanya said, "Lord!" and laughed.
"Oh!" MiHy said. you aH," in dissimilar accent, but identical
inflection, as Glass. She pulled from Copperhead.
She and Lanya clutched one another in a fit of giggles.
Copperhead frowned at Kid and shook his head.
Kid shrugged.
"I can't find my combl" Milly finally got out. "Isn't it amazing! I
carrt fmd my comb."
Lanya looked back at Kid: "Here, I'll see you in a litde while."
618 Dha!gren
Then, her arm around Millys shoulder, they fled the garden.
"Man," Glass said. "This is a pretty good party."
Copperhead, deprived of Milly. settled beside the first girL He bent
to whisper to her. She whispered back.
"God damn, nigger!" Spitt said. "You don'!' do nothin' but fuck, do
you?"
"Shit," Glass said. "I watched your pink ass poppin' up and down
there a pretty good long while."
"Yeah, sure. n Spitt said. "But, maD! you were in this one, then that
one, ,then this one again-God damnl"
Glass just chuckled.
Then both of them saw that Copperhead and the girl were mOving
off.
"Hey!" Spitt called and started after them.
Glass loped to their other side.
Phalanxed by blac.k and white, the girl and Copperhead left.
"Come on." Denny pulled away from Kid, who followed, wondering what of all that interchange had interested Denny most. But as
soon as Denny got between the hedges-one shoulder feathered with
shadow, the other bright under ,the lights ofJune-he stopped to adjust the control box. "There."
Nowhere, Kid was sure, had he seen John. But then he hadn't recognized Mil.dred before.
Guests surging Novemberwards cut them off from Copperhead
and the others.
After he'd left Denny. Kid thought: But the whole point was to
spend some time with him. Kid sucked his teeth, annoyed with himself, and stepped onto another bridge.
The lights on Kid's end worked.
Frank came toward him, gnnning hugely. squinting slighdy, face
full of floodlight.
I must be in silhouette, Kid thought.
"Hey!" Prank said. Oft is a really good party they're having for you.
Congratulations on evetyrhing. I'm having a great time."
"Yeah," Kid said. "Me too."
Beyond Frank, beyond the bridge, Kid saw a flash of metallic kelly.
Lanya was still with Milly. whose complicated hair was now in place.
They were still laughing. They were still going away.
"You see my book?"
"Sure.H
Palimpsest 619
"What'd you think of my poems? I was sort of interested in what
think of them. I mean because you're a real poet.·
Frank raised his eyebrows. "Thats really-Well .. . " He lowered
them. "Would you like me to be honest? I make the offer, because I
guess you've been getting a lot of compliments, espeCially here at
your party. And real honesty is going to be a little this
evening isn't the place for it and we should save it for some night at
Teddy'S."
"No, go on," Kid said. "r guess you didn't think they were all that
great?"
"You know ... " Prank grasped the rail with one stiffened arm and
leaned. "I was wondering what I was going to say to you about them
if you ever really asked. I've been thinking about you a lot. A lot
more, I guess, than you've been thinking about me. But I keep hearing about you all the time, people always talking about you. And it
occurs to me that I don't know you at all. But you've always seemed
like a good person. And I thought it would be good if somebody was
just straightforward with you, you know?" He laughed. "And there I
was, starting to say. 'They're great,' like everyone else. That's really
not my character. I think it's better to be honest."
"What did you think?" Kid heard the coldness in his Own voice,
and was astonished; listening to hitnself, he felt suddenly trapped.
"I didn't like them."
Its his smile, Kid thought and thought after that: No, you're just
trying to tell yourself it's the smile you don't like. He said, He didn't
like ,them, that's all. "What's wrong with them?"
Frank snorted a laugh and looked down at the rocks. "You really
want to know?t1
"Yeah," Kid said. "I wanHo know what you t!tink.·
"Well." Frank looked up. "The language is extremely artificial.
Theres no relation, or even tension, between it and any sort of real
speech. Most of the poems are pompous and over-emotional-I'm
sure you Were sincere about every one of them. But sincerity by itself,
without skill, usually just results in mawkishness. The lack of emotional focus makes subjects that could have been interesting into
Grand Guignol melodrama. They end up coming olI pretty banal. The
method's cliche, and often, so is the diction. And they're dull.' After a
silence in which Kid tried to figure the varieties of unpleasanmess he
was experiencing, Frank continued: "Look, you once told me you'd
only been writing poetry a couple of weeks. Didn't it ever strike you
620 Dhalgren
as a little improbable tbat you could just jump into it and the fitst
bateb you produced would be worth reading? I guess the thing that's
really got me upset over tho whole thing is all this business. n He gesturedat guests both sides of the bridge. "Tak once told me you were
as old as he is-two years older than me! Kid, most of the people
here think you're seventeen or eighteen! That, along with the poor
man's Hell's Angd bit, and all the gossip about the various kinky
things you get into-people are just here for the show. As Car as most
of them are concerned, Brass Orchids is like a performance by a talking dog. They find it so cunning that he speaks at all, they couldn't
care less what he actually said.»
"Un ... " Kid had intended that to be an Oh. "And you-n which
wasn't what he'd wanted to say either, but he went on because he had
to make sure-'you think the poems aren't very good?"
Frank said: "I think they're very bad:.·
"Wow,' Kid said, gravely. "And you think al4 the poems
moan to any of the people here?"
"To most people-n Frank put his hand, stiff-armed., on the rail
again-"poetry doesn't mean anything at all. From a couple of things
you said to me at the bar, though-about what you read and what
you felt-I suspect it does mean something tc> you. Which is why I
keep bothering to put my foot in my mouth the wayt've been."
"No," Kid said, "go on," thinking: But he hasn't stopped, bas he?
Kid's shadow cut 'Frank's face and purple shirt down the middle.
·With the variety that's part of current poetry-" Frank
blinked his visible, sqUinting eye-"perhaps !-t's silly for me to be
passing judgments like this. There are lots of kinds of poetry. And
sure, some kinds I personally prefer to others. I'll be honest: the kind
that yours is trying to be isn't a kind I find very interesting at its best.
Which is maybe the reason I should have kept my mouth shut in the
first place. Well, look, I'm not passing judgments. I'm just talking
about my own reactioDS. I suppose what I'm trying tc> say is that, as
far as I can tell-and I admit I'm biased-it seems pIetty clear what
you wanted to do in the poems. And pretty dear that you didn't COme
close. I mean, that last one, in the clunky blank verse-now that may
or may not be a good poem; I can't tell. It's unreadable.» Funk's
smile was wan. "But you have tc> admit, that's a stumbling block."
Kid grunted what he had intended as polite assent. It sounded
more like he'd been elbowed in the liver. And that's not, he thought,
what I want to sound like. "Maybe SOme time at Teddy's or someplace
Palimpsest 621
you could go over One or two of them with me and teR me what you
think is-II
"No." Frank shook his hand, fmgers straight, and his head, face ascowl. "No, no. It isn't that kind of ... Look, I can't tell you how to
be a poet. I can just tell you what I think. That's all."
Kid grunted again.
"Don't take it as anything more than that.'
Do you say thanks, now? Kid wondered. You sa)' thanks for compliments. "Thanks." It sounded like the most tentative question.
Frank nodded, looked over the rail again.
Kid stepped around him and walked toward the end of the bridge.
Halfway, like a tic, he thought Frank was about ,[Q tap his shoulder.
He turned, and realized, turning, it was Some untransformed kernel,
perfectly hostile, trying to emerge. Facing into the lights of May. Kid
could not tell if Frank looked at him or away.
Squinting, Kid swallowed the thought unworded and went on into
the high paths of January; from which he could look down on the
crowded terrace.
They're all here, Kid thought, for me! He was desperately uncomfortable. Frank's smile-it had made his criticism seem as though he
thought he was getting away with something. Well, that still didn't
change what he'd said. Samebooy else, Kid remembered but couldn't
remember who, had said they'd liked them ... and decided that
wasn't what he wanted to think about now. But with (he resolve
erupted memories of seven other reactions: Puzzled, indifferent, interests fleeting or otherwise. He recaUed Newboy's complex noncommittal and sensed in it betrayal-not so much Newboy's hut his
own-of something the poet had tried to tell him and he had not
been able to understand.
"This is like ... " he staned out loud, heard himself, and laughed.
This was like the night in the park when his fantasized reception had
pressed so heavily he'd been unable to write.
He laughed again.
A couple smiled and nodded.
His look became surprise as he noticed them. But they passed.
I want a drink, he thought, and saw he was ""ready heading for
the bar. I really want a drink very much.
This isn't, Kid found himself repeating, what it should be about.
Repealing it for the sixteenth or seventeenth time, he sat on the stone
rail, looking across at the table and the bottles,. still without a glass.
620 Dhalgrrn
as a little improbable that you could just jump into it and the first
batch you produced would be worth reading? 1 guess the thing that's
really got me upset over the whole thing is all business." He gestured at guests both sides of the bridge. "Tak once told me you were
as old as he is-two years older than mel Kid, most of the people
here think you're seventeen or eighteen! . That, along with the pOOr
man's Hell's Angel bit, and all the gossip about the various kinky
things you get into-people are just here for the show. As far as most
of them are concerned, Brass Orchids is like a performance by a talk.
ing dog. They find it so cunning that he speaks at all, they coul<ln't
care less what he actually said."
"Un . .. " Kid had intended that to be an Oh • • And you-" which
wasrr t what he'd wanted to say either, but he went on because he had!
to makesure-"you think the poems aren't very good?"
nank said: "1 think tney're very bad."
"Wow," Kid said, gravely. "And you think that's all the poems
mean to any of the people here?"
"To most people-" Frank put his hand, stiCC-armed, on the raH
"poetry doesrr t mean anything at all. From a couple of things
you said to me at the bar, though-about what you read and what
you felt-l suspect it does mean something to you. Which is why I
keep bothering to put myfoot in my mouth the way I've been."
"No," Kid said, "go on," thinking: But he hasn't stopped, has he?
Kid's shadow cut Frank's face and purple shirt down the middle.
"With all. the varietytha!'s partoC current poetry-" Frank
blinked his visible, squinting eye-"perhaps it's silly for me to be
passing judgments like this. There a're lots ·of kinds of poetry. And!
sure, sOme kinds 1 personally prefer to others. I'll be honest tbe kind
that yours is trying to be isn't a kind I find very interesting at its best.
Which is maybe the reason I should bave kept my mouth shut in the
first place. Well, look, I'm not passing judgments. I'm just talking
about my own reactions. I suppose what I'm trying to say is that, as
far as I can tell'-'alld 1 admit I'm biasedr-it seems pretty clear what
you wanted todD in the poems. And pretty clear that you didn't COlIle
close. I mean, that last one, in the clunky blank verse-now that may
or may nOt be a good poem; I can't tell. It's umeadable." Frank's
smile was wan, "But you have to admit, a stumbling block."
Kid grunted what he had intended as pOlite aSsent. It sounded
more like he<l: been elbowed in the liver. And that's not, he thought,
what I want to sound like. "Maybe SOme time at Teddy:' or someplace
Palimpsest 621
you could go over one or two of them with me and tell me what you
think is-"
"No." Frank shook his hand, fingers straight, and his head, face ascowl. "No, no. It isn't tbat kind of ... Look, I can't tell you how to
be a poet. I can just tell you what I think. That's all."
Kid grunted again.
"Don't take it as anything more than that."
Do you say thanks, now? Kid wondered. You say thanks for compliments. "Thanks." It sounded like the most tentative question,
Frank nodded, looked over the rail again.
Kid stepped around him and walked toward the end of the bridge,
Halfway, like a tic, he thought Frank was about ,[Q tap his shoulder.
He turned, and realized, turning, it was Some untransformed kernel,
perfectly hostile, trying to emerge, Facing into the lights of May, Kid
could not tell if Frank looked at him or away.
Squinting, Kid swallowed the thought unworded and went on into
the high paths of January; from which he could look down on the
crowded terrace.
They're all here, Kid thought, Cor me! He was desperately uncomfortable, Frank's smile-it had made his criticism seem as though he
thought he was getting away with something. Well, that still didn't
change what he'd said. Somebody else, Kid remembered but couldn't
remember who, had said they'd liked them .. , and decided that
wasn't what he wanted to think about now. But with the resolve
erupted memories of seven other reactions: Puzzled, indilIerent, interests fleeting or otherwise. He recalled Newboy's complex noncommittal and sensed in it betrayal-not so much Newboy's but his
own-of something the poet had tried to tell him and he had not
been able to understand.
"This is like .. ," he started out loud, heard himself, and laughed.
This was like the night in the park when his fantasized reception had
pressed so heavily he'd been unable to write.
He laughed again.
A couple smiled and nodded.
His look became surprise as he noticed them. But they passed.
I want a drink, he thought, and saw he was already heading for
the bar, I really want a drink very much.
This isn't, Kid found himself repeatiBg, what it shOUld be about.
Repeating it Cor the sixteenth or seventeenth time, he sat on the stone
rail, looking across at the table and the botdes, still without a glass.
622 Dhalgren
"Hi!" Then her expression (and handfuls of scarlet fell down
among green fires) changed. "What happened to you?"
His hands went out against her hips: Around one, blue puddled,
around the other, green.
"Am I bleeding?"
He slid them back to her buttocks, thinking, how warm she is; lay
his face against her warm belly. She took hold of his hair. Before his
blinking, black scales flittered to silver, to scarlet, to green.
"No. But you look like you just walked into a wall and now yoU'!\!
waiting for it to go away."
Kid made a sound supposed to launch the next sentence; it came
out another grunt. So he backed olI it and started again a little higher.
"I was just ... talking with Frank. About my ... poems."
She pulled loose and hoisted herself up on the wall beside him,
shoulder against his shoulder, leg against his leg, to become a deviling
glitter at the corner of his eye while he stared at his ruined thumbs,
now pressed together on his meshed fists' calloused drum. She asked:
. "What did he say?"
"He didn't like them, very much,'
She waited.
"He said ,everybody here thought I was a talking dog. They
think I'm some sort of dumb nut, that I'm ten years younger ,than I
am, and they'd all be just as astoaished that 1 even spelled my name
right-if! had a name ... "
"Kid • . . ' which came out much softer than his voice. She put her
hand over his. He raised one thumb. She caught it in her fist. "Thats
fucking nasty."
"Maybe its fucking true."
"tt isn't!" Her voice told him she was frowning: "That's Frank?
The one who's supposed to have had a book of poems published out
in California?D
Asking who else it could have been, he said: "Yeah?"
She answered: "He's jealous, Kid!"
"Huh? Of what," which was a statement, not a question,
"You're both poets, You both have a book published. Look at all
the attention you're gettiag, I doubt if this happened when his book
cameout.:rI.
"That's awfully easy. Besides, I don't care why he said it, I just wish
I knew if it were ttue,-()h, shit! Calkins didn't even read the poems
when he decided to publish them, Maybe he did when they finaUy
Palimpsest 623
came out and was so embarrassed he decided not to show up this
e:veuing."
"No I That's silly-"
"And you remember how Newboy kept beating around the bush
whenever I asked him if they were-"
"He enjoyed them-"
'Shit! He enjoyed me! If he was ttying to say anything, he was ttying to say he couldn't make the distinction."
"And what makes you think Frank is any more capable of making
it? He resents you, he resents the way everybody has fixated on you:
And then he tries to read the poems. At least Mr Newboy was honest
enough to admit he couldn't make the separation, Hell, I like them!"
"You're biased,"
'You think Frank isn't? Look, they She let go his thumb.
He looked over.
Her fists were knotted above her tidewise, swirling lap. "We're
going about this wrong." Her bottom lip moved over her teeth, to fix
her mouth for some new tone of voice. "He is right. About a lot of it,
anyway."
The simple hurt started in his throat. One swallow dragged it
down to his stomach's floor.
"He doesn't Uke your poems and he's probably sincere, About not
liking them. Thelma likes them, and she's probably just as sincere.'
"I was tryiog to remember her name. It was sort of hard."
"It should be just as hard to remember his. Being sincere doesn't
mean they're right. It just means they believe they are,'
"Yeah," he said. "Yeah. Sure. That's what Frank said, about the
poems.»
"Sorry."
"He's right about the people, about what everybody here thinks.'
"Not everybody," she said. "I suspect not even half. Do you care
what people think?"
"I care .. ," He paused. ' ... about people. The people here. So if
they think that, I've got to care about that too. And I wish they didn't
think what he said."
She made a sound of assent.
"Ma}'be we shouldn't have come to ,this party," he said.
"You want to go 1"
"No. I want to stay and see what happens." Kid opened a handoD
each knee. "It's something not to do agaio, maybe. But I don't think I
624 Dhalgren
want to leave in Ihe middle. I'm learning too much." He pushed from
the rail and turned to the bar.
Denny said, "What's the-?"
Kid put his arms around him: Denny's hands came up first to
push, then all of a sudden went tight across Kid's back. Kid pushed
his face against the dry, hot neck and thought: My face must feel cold.
He held the hot shoulders and thought: My hands ...
Denny moved once, was still, moved again; let his arms half
down, waiting to pun away.
Kid raised his head.
Two people passing looked away.
Kid stepped back.
Denny asked, "Are you all right?" then glanced at Lanya.
Her eyebrows moved to answer him.
"I'm okay," Kid said and wondered if he'd contradicted her.
She asked, "Yon'resuFe?"
Kid put his hand on her bright knee. "I'm okay. Somebody said
sOme nasty things about my poems. Whether they're true Or not, it
made me mad as hell."
Lanya sighed. "I guess that's why I'm glad I'm not an Artist. n
"Why are you always saying that?" Kid putled back. "There's a
whole room full of people inside listening to 'Diffraction' right now!
And enjoying it!"
"I mean-« Lanya looked uncomfortable-"1 mean Artist in the
way ,this party presupposes. Sure, 1 make a piece of music; or a fuck·
ing dress for that matter-you'd be astonished how similar they are!
But 1 don't just think you can be that kind of artist any more. Lots of
people do things lots better than lots of others; but, today, so many
people do so many things very well, and so many people are seriously
interested in so many different things people do for their own different reasons, you can't call any thing the best for every person, or
even every serious person. So you just pay real attention to the real
things that affect you; and don't waste your time knocking the rest.
This party-it's ritual attention, the sort you give a social hero. I
guess that can be an artist if there're few enough of them arounde.... n
"-like in Bellona?"
"Bellona is a very small part of the universe. And this party is a
very good place to bear that in mind. Kid, all the criticism you're
going to get here, good or bad, is going to be a ritual kind." She
glanced down under her brows. "Maybe thats what Mr Newboy was
trying to tell you?"
Palimpsest 625
"Maybe," Kid said, and put his face against her shoulder. "And
maybe he was just too chickenshitto say what Frank did."
"I don't think so." Lanya rubbed his hair again. "But that's just my
personal reaction.»
"Frank said that too."
"Then be generous and believe him." She pulled back. "You know,
someday I'm going to shock you aU and produce a philosophical treatise thick as The Critique of Pure Reason, The Phenomenology of Mind,
and Being and Time put together! It'll be in neatly numbered, crossreferenced paragraphs, a third of it mathematical symbols. I'll call
it-" she drew a thumb and forefinger across the air, top and bottom
of an imaginary signboard-"Preliminary Notes Toward a Calculus of
Attentional and Intentional Perception, with an Analytics of Modular-I
guess 'modular' is the adjective from 'modal'?-Feedback. Then you'll
see. All of you! "
"You could always call it: Lanya Loohs at Life," Kid suggested.
"Poets!" Lanya exclaimed, mocking despair. "Artists!-God!" and
put her hot, pale hands around his, to cage the beasts his fingers
were.
He pulled them from the cave to rest them On the blades turning,
tic-tie-tic, On his chest.
She stood, shedding turquoise to the hem, and moved by Denny.
The boy's hip pocket stuck out with COrners from the control box.
"Take a walk," Lany. said. "You'll feel better."
Kid nodded, started away from them, realized he was fleeing, and
slowed.
Dragon Lady swung around the newel at the bottom of the steps
and said to Baby: "Now what you wanna go say that to that woman,
for, huh? Huh?"
"'Cause she said I_ito
"Now why you wanoa go say something like that?"
Three steps behind them, Adam walked With Nightmare; Nightmare doubled with laughter, held his stomach and staggered up the
stairs. From knee to cuff one scarlet pants leg was smeared from a fall.
Adam's eyes were very wide behind loose, rough hair; his grin
split, brown, Over yellow teeth.
"God damn!" Dragan Lady said. "You don't go around saying
things like that."
·Shit.· Babys hands were locked before his groin. His head was
down and his blond hair swayed as though he worried something in
his teeth. "If she hadn't said-aw, shit!"
626 Dha!gnm
Nightmare's hand fell on Kid's shoulder. His face came forward,
fighting to explain, but exploded in laughter. He smelled very drunk,
At last Nightmare just shook !tis head, helplesslY, and Staggered,
loudly, away.
Kid took a breath and went on down, pondering madnesss con.
stituents. Later he could not recaR where his thoughts had gone from
there. And he pondered that loss more than days Or names.
Below, Frank said: "Wait a minute ... wait a minute! Waitr-!"
Kid held the bridge's black metal rail and looked down at the path.
They came, laughing, a-long the short-cut from March to October.
The rocks were covered with moss and slicked with floodlight.
"l.ook, now I know something thafs sort of funny."
"AR right." Black-sweatered Bill stopped, still laughing. "What?"
Thelma stood to the side.
"You mustn't say anything nasty about him, Frank," Ernestine said.
"I think they've all been 'perfectly charming, everything considered."
"He's a nice guy," Frank said. "He really is. But I've met !tim a couple of times before, that's all. And 1 just-"
"Well,' drawled a man whose freckled skull was ringed with white
hair, "I haven't yet. But his friends are the funniest children 1 have
ever seen. Oh, they put on quite a show. Gibbons, I tell you! A real
bunch of little black gibbons!"
Bill said: "Most of them aren't that little."
"I just wonder," Frank repeated, "whether he actually wrote them
Or not."
"Wby would you think he didn't?" Bill asked, turning.
"I met him," Frank said, "once down in that A
long time ago. I'd lost a notebook a rew weeks back and I was telling
him about it. Suddenly he got very excited-very upsel, and called
the bartender over to bring him this nOlebook that he told me he'd
found in the park. He told me he'd found it, aIready filled up with
writing, I'm very SUre of tbat. I flipped through it, and it was all full
of poems and journals and ,things. He wanted to know if it was mine.
It wasn't, of COUISe. But at least two of the poems in that nOlebookand 1 remember because they struck me as rather odd-I'd swear
were identical with two of the poems in Brass Orchids. That notebook
had a poem On practically every other page."
"Are you serious?" Roxanne asked as though she thought the tale
very funny. "Well, you mustn't ever tell Roger. He would feel quite
had!"
Palimpsest 627
Bill let out a loud, "Hal" at the sky. "If it is true, that's the funrties!
thing I've heard all night!"
"I wouldn't make it up!"
"It's a perfectly awful thing to say," Ernestine said. "Do you really
think he would do a thing like that?"
"Well, you've met !tim," Frank said. "He's not what 1 would call
the literary type."
"Oh, everybody and their brother writes poems," Bill tossed away.
"You think, then-" which was Kamp's voice: It came from under
the bridge where Kid could not see-"he took all the poems out of
this notebook, now?"
"Oh, perhaps ... " Frank began. "I'm not accusing him of anything. Maybe he only took those two. 1 don't know. Maybe he only
took a couple of lines that I just happened to recognizeThelma said: "You said they were identical,· and Kid strained and
failed to hear more than her words.
"I said I thought they were,· Frank said, w!tich was not, Kid remembered with obsessive lucidity, what he had said at all.
"That's interesting," Bill reflected, head, down, all dark hair and
black sweater. He started walking.
The otheIS followed hiro under the bridge. ,
Frank said: "He told me that night he'd only been a poet for, 1
think he put it, a couple of weeks. And then, ,there was this notebook
he'd found, all filled up with poems that-well, the two 1 looked at
closely-are awfully similar to two in his book." The voices echoed
beneath. "What would you think?"
Thelma (he could no! see her face) was the last to go under.
"Well, you obviously think he took them-· The voice's identity
was obscured by echo.
"I t!tink," someone's voice came back, "hel; just a rtice-l wouldn't
say dumb, just non-verbal-guy that probably isn't too concerned
with the Significance of that sort of thing. Hell, -I like him. With all
those guys in the chains he's got running around for bodyguards, 1
Sort of hope he likes us too."
"He didn! t sign his name to the book," the southerner said.
"Oh, Frank, 1 think you're just-"
Kid had to clear his throat so missed Ernestine's last words in the
rattle. (Run to the 0 ther rail, hear what they said as they emerged
... ) He looked along the empty path.
In an Oregon forest, back during that winter, on his day off, a log,
628 Dhalgrrn
loosed from the pile he'd been climbing, had crashed his leg, bloody_
ing his right calf and tearing his jeans. He'd thought his shin was
broken. But, finally. he had been able to hobble back to the
bunkhouse, a quarter of a mile away-it took forty minutes. The
whole time he kept thinking: "This hurts mOre than anything I've
ever felt before in my life. This hurts more than anything I've
ever ... n He reached the empty cahill, with the thought repealing
like a melody now, rather than an idea; he had sat dowa On the
lower bunk-it belonged to a laborer named Dehlman-opened his
belt, got the seat of his jeans from beneath his buttocks, and in a single motion stripped them down hisHe hadn't screamed. Instead, his lungs flattened themselves in his
chest, and for the neXt ten minutes he could only make little panting
sounds. Blood and flesh, dried to the cloth, had stripped the length
of his leg, sending the pain into realms he had ne)! known exiSted.
When he could think again, the still running thoughl, connected
with the memory of that So much lesser pain, seemed silly.
He dropped his hand from the rail and thought about this (and for
Some reasOn the name the man on whose bunk he'd lain with his
bleeding calf) and tried to recall his reaction to Frank's criticisms of
ten minutes ago.
He could not fit both intc> anything like a Single picture. (They
took it 50 lightly!) He blinked at the empty path.
I wrOte ... ?
Kid's eyes stung; he wandered from the bridge. Raising his hand to
rub his face, he saw blurred brass and stopped the motion.
One foot hit something on the path and he stepped ahead unsteadily.
I remember re-writing them!
I remember changing lines, to make them more like something
.. . mine?
Kid hlinked; and his rough flngers Were circled with scrolled
blades. Did the first terrOr precede the scream?
... someone-Dollar? Dollar, beyond the hedge, screamed.
Kid flung back his hands and ran-toward the sound. Because
what was behind him was too frightening.
As he sprinted iota the garden, a low branch struck his face.
grasped away leaves with his bladed hand, came up short, and
heard (though he could no! see) Dollar scream again, thinking: My
God, the rest of them are so quiet!
Black and hrown arms waved and spun (and among them was
Palimpsest 629
Tarzan's yellow hair and dough-colored shoulder), caugn! against
someone buried in the brawl. Somehody grunted.
Thelma, watching, SUcked in her breath, rasping the silence.
From out the fray: "Hey. watch it ... I Watch it ... ! Watch out for
the ... Unhl"
Their scrabbling boots were louder than their caught breaths and
voices.
Kid lunged, grabbed, pulled, and only just remembered to get his
orchid up out of the way.
"Hey. what you-'
Cathedral hit him as he pulled Thruppence off.
Priesfs head struck his flank hard enough to hurt.
Kid swung his hand out and around, and Spider didn't shriek hut
hissed: "Ehhhhhhhhhhhhh ... God-damn motherfuckerl n A filament
of blood widened on Spider's belly.
"GET OFF HIM!' Kid pulled the Ripper back. "God-damn it, get
offhiml"
Raven, Tarzan, then Lady of Spain, still pummeling, got yanked
back.
As they recognized him, one by one they fell away among the
guests who ringed the garden. More were edging in.
Siam, in the central tussle, looked up, then ducked under Kid's
arm; Kid stumbled forward, lunged between the last two (Angel and
lack the Ripper) who sprinted aside; he grabbed the hack of Dollar's
vest, his orchid still high.
Dollar scroamedonce more, and then went ioto fetal coUapse on
the flags. "Don't kill me, please don't kill me! Don't kill me, Kid,
please don't kill me! I'm sorry, Kid! Don't kill me!" Dollar's right
cheek was hruised and bleeding; his left eye was puffy. and his mouth
looked like it had dandruff. Trying to get him up, Kid almost slipped .
Swiveling his head, h. saw his blades flash; leaves like green scales of
the night fell from his opening fingers. He saw the ring of scorpiOns
and guestsErnestine Throckmorton had jabbed both fists beneath her chin.
Lanya, Nightmare, Denny, and Dragon Lady crowded the garden entrance. Baby and Adam pushed around them. Captain. Kamp, on the
other side of the fountain-water dribbled a rust-rimmed stain down
a marble breast and actoss a cornucopia-looked angry and was
about to step up. The southern colonel (with the ring of white hair)
at his side was about to restrain him.
630 Dha!grrn
"I didn't do nothing 1 I reaHy didn't mean to do nothing. I didn't
mean nothing by it, 1 swear, Kidl I swear I didn't do it!"
Kid looked down. "WILL YOU GET THE FUCK UPl" He lowered
hiS orchid.
Dollar ducked his head.
"Get on up, will you?" He jerked the back of Donar's vest again.
Glass grabbed Dollar under one arm and helped Kid pull him to
his feet. Kid and Glass excbanged frustrated looks.
"You okay?" Glass asked. ·Can you stand up?"
·Is it all right ... now?" Ernestine Throckmorton asked.
Kid turned to tell her just to go awayBut she was ten reet off, and talking to Nightmare, who said:
·Yeah, okay. Just forget it, huh? Yeah, it's aU right."
And other people were walking.
Kid's senses had grown amphetamine bright. Listening, however,
words blurred back to normal incoherence.
"I didn't do--l· shrieked in his ear again as Dollar tried to wedge
between Kid and Glass.
Tarzan said: ·Oh, man, I'm not gonna hurt youl" He looked at
Kid. "But ifhe's gonna go around callin' people 'nigger' he's gonna get
his head broke."
"Yeahl" from the hirsute Raven, behind Tarzan's left shoulder.
"Huh?" Kid asked.
And, "Yeah, I'm gonua break his fuckin' head!" from Ripper,
behind his right.
·1 didn'! do notMn'j" Dollar pulled on Kid's arm and stumbled
back against Glass who eaught him up. "YQU all do it all the time! You
all say it, why can't I say iU"
"Aw; come on, manl" Kid said. "You all must be putting me on!"
"He's gonna call the wrong nigger 'nigger' and he's gonua have to
pick his head up off the ground and screw it back onl' D-t said.
"AIl right," Kid lold DoHar. "Who you calling names?"
"Me, God-damn ill" Tarzan said. "And if that psycho-litde bastard's gonna-n
"Aw; shit!" D-t said. "What he gonna call you 'nigger' for? He was
the Ripper, andth. Ripper don't like it. 1 don't like it
either."
"Oh: Tarza,n said. "I he was talking to me . . . He was
looking at me when he said it."
D-t grunted. "God-damn, nigger, the Ripper was standing just behind your shoulder!" He pointed across the garden.
Palimpsest 631
Several people stepped aside from the line his finger projected
over the lawn.
Tarzan said, "Ch. II
"l told him to say he was sorry," the Ripper said. "I didn't want to
start no trouble, here at the God-damn party. If he'd a' said he was
sorry, I wouldn't of done nothing."
"Okay," Kid told Dollar. "Tell him you're sorry."
"Nol" Dollar lurched in Glass' grip. Glass' vinyl vest swung back
from the crossed scar poking over his belt, flapped to again.
·You say yoil're sorry." Kid held the back of Dollar's neck with one
hand and pUt the orchid points against the lower right quadrant of
his belly; the dirty flesh jerked. Dollar's chains jingled. "Say you're
sorry, or I'll take your appendix out, right here, and we'll spread
everything you got allover the God-damn ground-"
"Nooooo!" Dollar whined and twiSted. "Please don't kill mel"
Talk had stopped again.
"Say you're sorry."
Cll'rn sorryI"
"Okay." Kid let his bladed hand drop and looked at the Ripper.
"He's said he's sorry. Okay?"
"He didn't have to say it." The Ripper looked sullenly a.ound the
circle. "I already got my licks in."
But other guests had begun to talk once more.
"Okay,' Kid said. "Then let's break it up. WILL YOU PLEASE
BREAK IT UP GOD-DAMN ITl" He pushed Dollar forward by the
head. Glass came with them.
Nightmare said: "Come On you guys, will you? You heard the Kid.
Break it up! Get out of here 1 Go ani"
Somebody asked: "What happened?"
Somebody else: "What did he do?"
"I didn't see. Did you see what happened? Is it all right now1
"No, Ijust came in. I guess it's all right. .. ?"
Kid?D
That was Bill.
"When you got a chance, can I ...• but somebody moved between
!hem.
Which was just as well.
Kid held Dollar by one arm. Glass held him by other. Kid dug
a finger into Dollar's armpit. "Didn't I tell you if something went
wrong. you come to me?t)
"I didn't get no chance," Dollar said. "I told 'em, I told 'em just
632 Dhalgren.
like you said, if they messed with me, 1 was gonna tell the Kid? Just
like you said." He looked over his smudged shoulder at Glass. "Were
you there? Did you hear me tell 'em?"
Glass's head-shake showed more frustration than anything else.
"But 1 didn't get no chance to, you know? Them colored guys was
all over me. n
Frank leaned over the rail and called down. "Hey, Kid, is every_
thing all-?"
. Glass glanced up. Kid didn't.
"1 just don't think them guys-" Dollar's voice took on an echo
beneath the bridge- "you know?-like me too much. I guess, you
know, some people just don't like other people.'
"r don't exactly love you," Kid said.
"I just wish_a Dollar rolled his head forward and spoke down at
his chest-·somebody would tell me what 10 do."
"You don't have it too easy, huh?" Glass said, and didn't "ven
bother to glance at Kid.
"Oh, man!!! Dollar said. "Oh, man, I just don't know, sometimes,
you know? I'm half sick all the God-damn time. lean hardly eat the
fucking food. Because of my stomaca, you know? I can't drink notbin'
except wine, or I get sick. I don't get drunk, 1 just get sick. Unless its
wine. I mean half them God-damn niggers are-" he looked at
Glass- "the colored guys ... " then he looked at Kid. 'Well, that's
wbat they say, I mean-"
"Say your thing," Glass said .
•. . . half the God-damn colored guys are drunk already. That's why
they jumped me, I bet. They wouldn't of jumped me if they wasn't
drunk. They're nice guys; even the girls. 1 was just kiddin' anyway
... I wasn't drunk. I didn't drink nothing here except some wine,
'cause I didn't want to get sick at your party. I just wish somebody
would tell me what to do."
They came from beneath the bridge.
The path bent like a boomerang into the rocks.
"You know? If somebody would just tell me ... "
"Why don't you just keop from bothering people who're gonna
beat you up?" Glass said
"Now what I mean," Dollar said. "Everybody:' always tellin'
me what not to do. Keep away from this. Get out of that. Don't bother
the other. If somebody would just tell me what I should do, I'd work
my fuckin' ass oil."
Palimpsest 633
"Right now you would," Glass said, "'cause somebody just scared
the shit out of you."
"I Dollar said. "I really would."
"You just come on with me," Glass said. "All right?"
By the edge of a black railing above, among small trees, Copperhead, Spitt, and the girl in maroon levis waited.
Dollar blinked at Kid and rubbed at the flaking corner of his
mouth with' his thumb. He looked sad and scared.
"We ain't gonna hurt you," Glass said. "We already got our licks in,
too. All we gonna do is make sure you don't get in no more trouble
here at the Kid's party."
Kid, doubting, let go of Dollar's arm.
"r JUSt wish somebody would tell me what I was supposed to do."
"Go on with them," Kid said.
Glass and Dollar climbed up the slope among the brush and
saplings.
Kid turned before Dollar reached the top.
r want, among all these people who are here because of me, one to
come up and tap me on the shoulder and ask me if I'm all right, if!
reel okay, say come on, let's go get a drink, after that you must need
one. And, God·damn it, r don't want to go all hangdog looking for
some person who'U oblige. I just want it to happen. Sometimes the
pressure of vision against the retina or sound againSt the drum exhausts. Where have I lost myself, where have r laid the foundation of
this duct? Walking in these gardens, it is as if the nervous surface of
rhe mind registering the passage of ,time itself has, by its exercise,
been rubbed and inllamed.
Did I write ... ?
Finding the thought was like looking down again at a pattern of
tiles he'd been walking over for hours.
Did!. .. ?
The sublimest moment I remember (Kid pondered) was when I sat
naked under that tree with the notebook and the pen, putting down
one word then another, then another, and listening to the ways they
tied, while the sky greyed out of night. Oh, please, whatever I lose,
don't let me lose that one-
"Hey, Kid!'"
"HuhJD
But the Ripper had only called in passing, with a wave, and was
walking on.
634 Dhalgren
Kid nodded hesitantly back. Then he frowned. And for the liIe of
him could not remember what he'd just been thinking. The on!
word in his mind was ... artichokes. .}'
Spider, alone in October, sat on the ground, half in darkness, beside the floodlight, swabbing at his belly with a bunched piece of
newsprint It kept flapping, bloody, in front of the glaring glass.
"Are you all right?" Kid asked.
"Huh? Oh, yeah." Spider mashed the paper smaller. just
scratched me, you knOw. It didn't bleed too much."
"I'm really sorry," Kid said. "You reel okay? I didn't see you."
Spider nodded. "I know. n He crumpled the paper some more. "I'm
a fuckin' mess_
n
he pulled his boot heels under him and got to his
feet-"but it was just a scratch. n He held back his vest and brushed
himself with the paper, pressed it to himself. "It was only really bleediIlg bad at one end. n
Kid looked up at the black youngsters lowered Iace. "You sute its okay now?" .
"I guess so. Now. Man, you scared me to death, though. I was expecting to see my guts come out all over the grass. n
ql'msorry, man. Lemme see?"
Spider slared down.
His stomach looked like someone had smeared the teak flesh With
paint. From One end of the cut, red rhreaded down toward his belt.
Tho: left side of his pants lap was black maroon. He blotted his belly agam.
"You're bleeding like a pigl" Kid said.
"Its just a cut. n Spider touched his stained stomach With his finger_
tips (He bites his nails, too, Kid thought), 'felt the laut skin over 'the
top of his naVel, pulled the waist of his pautsout to unstick il. "I,t don't hurt none. n
"Maybe they have something inside, some bandages or something. Comeon_n .
"Its stopping,:IS Spider said. "Us ganna stop Soon. "
He torned the stained paper around, exanrining it.
Blood is a living tissue, Kid thought, remembering his high school
biology teachers glasses knocked from the edge of the marble lab
table, one lens smithereening Over the mustard tiles. "Look, COme on.
Lets go get a drink, then. After that, you look like you could use it n
·Yeah. n Spider Smiled. "Yeah, come on. A drink. I'd like that' He
grinned, balled the paper, flung it nOisily into the brush. "Uhrmn ..• "
Palimpsest 635
said after three steps. "Maybe I should go inside and wash it or
.scm.thmg. "
- "I'm sorry, man, n Kid said. "I'm really sorry. n
"I know, n Spider said. "You didn't do it on purpose."
When they were halfway across july, Ernesrine Throckmorton
looked up and said, "Oh! I mean my ... God!"
In the following confuSion, Denny and Lanya (purple, purple
blooming blue) found him while Ernestine and several others tried to
get Spider to go inside.
"I wanna ... drink, n Spider said, hesitantly.
Ernestine asked Spider: "Do you feel all right? Are you okay?"
"He wants a drink, n Kid said.
Spider looked confused; then the confusion sank in belligerent,
silent embarrassment; he let himself be taken away.
"That could get infected," Everett Forest said for the third time.
Madame Brown stood across the crowd, folding and turning her
hands. The leash swung and sagged and jingled.
Kid kept touching Lanya's shoulder; they stood watchiIlg. (The
second time she touched his hand in return, but not the first, third,
or fourth.)
Muriel, panting, pushed to her forepaws; then lowered her muzzle
again to the ground.
Denny, in the crowding, had pushed against Kid several times, settling a hand on his shoulder, arm, or back. Kid contemplated some
response-
"KidII'
Kid didn't look around at first.
"If you've a few minutes to spare ... Kid, do you think I could
have you for a Iew minutes 1"
When he did torn (Lanya and Denny turned too), Bill was smiling
at him over the surrounding heads, and holding a box that looked
much like the controls to Lanya's dress up near his ear. ·Can I have
you for a few minutes ... Kid?"
this time when Kid touched Lanya and Denny, they came With him.
(Thinking: They would have COme anyway; both, working Within
entirely different mechanics, have developed curiosities that would
not let them miss it!) ·Sure," Kid said. "What you want?"
"Thank you." Bill grinned, and adjusted the mike clipped to the
pocket in his black tortleneck pullover. "This is on now. We might as
well leave it going, so you can get used to ignOring it. But lets get out
636 Dha!gren
of al1 this noise. Why don't we go back-Say, what happened to that
tall black kid? He's part of your nest?"
"I cut him,' Kid said.
Bill tried not to look surprised.
"It was an accident," Kid said to the mike. He unsnapped the ornate blades from his wrist.
·You're-· Bill noticed Lauya and Denny but didn't say anythin,g
to them-"wry strict with your own, aren't you?"
Kid decided: I'm being told, not asked, and said nothing.
"Where we going?" Denny whispered, and looked warily again at
Bill's cassette recorder.
"To hell, if we're invited nicely," Kid said. "Shut up and come on.
He's Dot going to make you say anything. Just me."
"Let:<; ... ' Bill looked like he was trying 10, poIitely, think of a way
to get rid of Lauya and Denny.
Lanya looked as .though she were about to, politely, excuse herself
and take Denny with her.
".hey should come," Kid said. "They're my friends."
"Of course. I just wanted to ask you a few questions-let:' go this
way.' They passed through another garden. "This is really a little
confused, what with Roger:' not being here. I guess he's ... gone for
the night. He wanted to get a chance to talk to you, I know that; he
told me so. He wanted to find out a few things he thought the readers
of the TImes might be interested in ... we were actually going to iuterview you together. I help Roger with a lot of his newspaper work.
Draft a lot of his articles. As you might imagine, he:' a busy man.'
"You write his articles?" Lauya asked. "r always wondered where
he got the ,time to do all he does.'
"I don't actually Write anything he signs. But ... 1 research a lot
for him." Bill turned up a small path Kid remembered having walked
Over twice during the evening but couldn't remember where it led.
"Roger wanted to ask you-well, we both did ... just a few things. I
was going to wait for him. But 1 get the impression that people might
start leaving soon. And if Roger didn't get back in ,time, 1 know he'd
stin want me to use the opporturuty."
Before two spotlights, fixed low to trees at opposite corners of the
clearing, white wicker furnimre cast black coils and curlicues on the
grass.
"Nobody seems to have found their way here yet. Why don't we
have a Seat and get Slarled?"
Palimpsest 637
Denny sat beside Kid on the edge of the bench, leaning forward on
his knees to look over at Bill, who took the paddle-backed lounge.
Lanya stood a little ways away, leaning on a tree trunk, once brushing
at her autumn-colored skirts to strike in them silver rain.
"I want to ask you a few questions about your gang-your nest.
And then something about your work ... your poetry. All nght?"
Kid shrugged. He was excited and uncomfortable; but the two
states, vivid as feeliogs, seemed to cancel any physical sign of either.
He looked at Lanya.
She had folded her arms and was Ustening rather like someone
who had just passed by and stopped.
Denny was lOOking at the control box, wanting to play with it, but
also wondering if this were the time.
Lanya hovered among various blues.
Bill ran his hand from the mike along the wire to the recorder,
turned a knob, and looked up again. "Tell me first, how do you feel
baving your book published? It:' your first book, right?"
"Yeah. It's my first. I like it, all the commotion. I think it:' stupid,
but it:' ... fun. There aren't very many mistakes in it ... I mean the
ones the people who put the type together made."
"Well, tbat's very good. You feel, then, the poems are as you wrote
them; that YOll can take full responsibility for them?"
"Yeah." Kid wondered why the mumed accusation did not make
him more uncomfortable. POSSibly because he'd been through it already in silence.
"I mean," Bill went on, "1 remember Ernest Newboy telling us,
one evening, about how bard you worked on the galleys. He was very
struck by it. Did Mr Newboy help you much with the poems themselves? I mean, would you say he was an influence on your work?"
"No." He does think, Kid thought, that fm seventeen! He laughed,
and the familiarity of the deception put him even more at ease. He
moved back on the lounge and let his knees ran apart. So far it wasn't
so bad.
Something moved at the corner of Kid's eye. BHllooked up too.
Revelation stood behind them with Milly, whom he had not seen
since they had surprised her in the bushes.
Denny went, • Shhhhh," took his finger from his lips and painted
to the recorder.
"Can you tell me-"
Kid looked back.
638 Dhalgren
Bill coughed. "-tell me something about the scorpions, about the
way you live, and why you live that wayl"
"What do you want to know?"
"Do you like it?"
"Sure.:tI
"Do you feel that this way of life offers you some protection, Or
make it easier {or you to survive in Bellona? 1 guess it's a pretty dangerous and unknown place, now.'"
Kid shook his head. "No . . . it isn't that dangerous, for us. And
I'm getting to know it pretty well."
"You all live together, in a sort of commune-nest, as you call it
Tell me, do you know the commune of young people that used to live
in the park?"
Kid nodded. ·Yeah. Sure."
"Did you get along well with each other?"
"Pretty much. " .
. "But they're fairly peaceful; while your group believes in violence,
is that right?"
"Well, violence-" Kid grinned-"that isn't something you believe in. That's something ,that happens. But I guess it happens more
around us than around them."
"Someone told me that, for a while, you were a member of this
other commune; but apparently you preferred the scorpions."
"Yeah?" Kid pressed his lips and nodded. " ... Well, no, actually. I
was never a member of the other commune. 1 hung around; they fed
me. But they never made me a part of it The scorpions, now, soon as
1 got with them, they took me right in, made me a part. That's probably why 1 like it better. We had a couple of kids hanging around our
place who should probably have ended up with the park people; but
we fed them tOo. Then they drifted on. That's what you have to dO."
Bill nodded, his own lips pursed. "There's been talk that Some of
the things you guys indulge in get pretty rough. People have been
killed ... or so one story goes.'
"People have been hurt," Kid said. "One guy was killed. But he
wasn't a .scorpion. '"
"But the scorpions killed him . .. 1"
Kid turned 1lP his hands. "What am 1 supposed to say now?" He
grinned again.
Behind Bill, a dozen others had gathered. Another cough, behind
Kid, made him realize another dozen had come 1lp to listen.
Palimpsest 639
BiII.'s eyes came back to Kid. "Do you think, objectively, that the
way you're living is ... a good way?"
"r like it.' Kid felt his jaw with his wide fingertips and heard fiveh01lr stubble rasp. "But that's subjective. Objectively? It depends on
what you think of the way the rest of the world is living."
"What do you think of it?"
"Well, look at it," Kid said. Then he coughed, which caused some
general laughter, defining the audience he had not looked at yet as
thirtY, or even forty: scorpions and other guests.
Nightmare stepped into the clearing, said, "Say, what's everybody- ?"
then got quiet and went to sit on the grass next to Dragon Lady.
"How would you describe life in the nest?'
"Fucking crowded!·
"Oh, man!' D-t slapped Tarzan's palm. "He said fucking crowded!"
lCShut up, you twO,:tI Raven said.
"And with all the crowding, and all the violence, you still manage
to work-to write. D
"When I get a chance.·
Lanya laughed at that. She was the palest orange, flaking to palest
pink and purple. Denny held the box between his knees; his arms
were folded.
"A lot of people have commented on the, how shall I say, colorfulness of your poems,their vivid descriptive quality. Is there any
connection between the violence and that?"
"Probably. But 1 don't know what it is.'
"Do your friends in the nest like your book?"
"1 don't think most of the guys read too much.'
"Hey, man!" Nightmare called out. "1 ain't even in his fuckin' nest
and r read every fuckin' one!" which caused someone else to call:
"Yeah. they're great! The Kid writes great." and someone else: I'Sure,
ain't you got this party for him?"
Kid leaned back and laughed and closed his eyes. His own laughter
had begun in the calamity of shouts and calls.
"Come on," Bill said loudly. 'Come on, now. I just want to ask the
Kid a few more questions. Come on ... "
Kid opened his eyes and found his lashes wet. Ught around the
garden glittered and streaked. He shook his head.
"r want to ask you, Kid-'
'Come on, be quiet!" Lady of Spain said. "Come on, shut up, man!
He's trying to ask the Kid some questions!·
640 Dhalgrm
"-want Ie> ask you: How would you sum up what you're trying 10
say in your poems?"
Kid leaned his elbows OR his knees. "How the hell am I supposed
to do that, sum up what I'm trying to say?'
"I guess you!d rather we just read-"
"Shit, I don't care if you read them or not. "
"I just meant that-"
"I'm trying to-" Kid looked up at Bill, frowning in the pause-
"to construct a complicitous illusion in lingual catalysis, a crystalline
and conscientious alkahest."
" ... again?' Bill asked.
"You listen to that too carefully and you'll figure out what it
means." Kid let the frown reverse into a grin. "Then the words will
die on you and you won't understand any more."
Bill laughed. "Well, do you feel that your work accomplishes what
... ever you sat out to do?"
"How am I supposed to decide that?" Kid sat back again. "r mean
suppose one person liked something I wrote. I'd want to make what I
say here mean something to him. Suppose somebody else didn't Ilke
it. I'm a snob. I'd like to be able to talk to him too. But somebody
you've had a good time with and somebody you've had a bad time
with, you talk to in different ways. There isn't much overlap in what
you can say to both. Maybe,just, I did it." Kid sat back. "And maybe.
you know; other people can think ·of reasons not to even insist on
that too much. Look, the guys are getting fidgety. I've made too much
noise abeady." He looked around at the gathered nest. "r guess Mr C
just isn't going to make it this evening."
Ernestine Throckmorton (Spider stood beside her, his belly lashed
with gauze and adhesive) said: "I guess he isn't. He'll be abSOlutely
mortified he missed you. I just don't know where-"
'You think something happened to him?" Raven looked around
with swaying top-knot. "You want us to go out and look for him?"
"Oh, no!" Ernestine said. "No, thatl; not necessary. When he lefl,
he said he ... might be late. Thats why he put the Captain and myself in charge."
Neither the Captain nor Frank were present. Palil Fenster, with a
beer can at his hip, stood directly opposite.
"Look, we've got most of my guys here, just about." Kid stood,
feeling among his neck chains. "It's getting time for me to split. Any
of you guys who want to come along with me, come on." He caught
Palimpsest 641
his shield (nicked his thumb knuckle on an orchid prong and
thought: The price of dramatic exits) and Ilipped the pip.
The scorpions on the grass squinted in blue light. Denny did
something with the box and lalighed: And Lanya stood up a-swirl in
crimson and indigo.
Where Dragon Lady had been, her dragon rose.
"Uh ... thank you." Bill looked about. "Eh, thank you an awful
lot. I'm sure Roger will have what he ... I mean you gave some very
interesting . ..
People got to their feet amidst the glOwing, growing menagerie.
The 3-D Rorschach that was Denny turned and turned and moved
through the crush.
Kid doused long enough for Lanya to see him. She caught his
hand. Branches cut throligh the insubstantial luminosities wheeling
the garden.
"How'd r do?"
"Lord," she said. "This has been a partyl Roger doesn't know what
he missed-then again, maybe he does."
In another garden, beyond some dozen guests, Kamp and Fenster
had become deeply embroiled in animated agreement.
Heavy Cathedral, with white California (greasy hair swinging long
as his chains), was very drunk in the corner:
"We goin'? Oh, shit ... Oh, shit, I can't go ... "
"What we goin' for?H
"I think we gotla go, you know ... ?"
"We gotla go already ... ?"
Three others went splashing through the pool in May.
And Copperhead began to laugh and point so vigorQusly, Kid
thought: He's drunk enough to fall down in a minute. Moments later,
however, along with Glass, the black girl, Dollar, and Spitt, Copperhead was ambling across the terrace.
Kid thought (and Saw Captain Kamp look up and thought as
counterpoint to that first thought: He's thinking the same thing):
They't< going to start breaking up the place.
They didn't.
"Oh," Kamp said to Ernestine, "you mean they're going now ...
well, eh ... Good night!"
Revelation said: "Hey. man, r can't go.· He shook his head, deviling his hair to a gold cotton. Yellow chains rattled over his pink, pink
chest. "r got sometlting gain' here, you know? And I'm so fuckin'
642 Dhalgren
smashed .•. look, you go on, and maybe I'll see you back there in the
morning."
Kid nodded, pushed! past and came up before Thelma who opened
her mouth1 said, «Um . . . D and was gone.
Angel, at the bar table, picked up a full botde of whiskey, put it
under his thin arm, and started after the others.
"Hey ... " the black bartender said.
Captain Kamp hurried up.
I c01'lld be a hero, Kid thought, and make him put it back. Suddenly
he said, "Shit ... " pulled away from l.anya, and loped over to the bar.
"Captain, we've got a long-"
"Your friend," Captain Karnp said, "just walked off with a full boule
of .......... :tI
"-got a long walk back. And I just don't think one is going to be
enough." Kid picked up another bolde (he chose it because it had d,e
cap on, but saw, when it was in his hand that it was only half full:
Well, it was a gesture) and, to the Captain's frown, flipped on his
shield. "Tell Mr Calkins thanks. Good night.'
Kamp squinted and pulled back, his face washed ;With light the
same pale blue as his shirt. His eyes, widening, rose.
When Kid left the terrace steps and was halfway across the lawn,
"You," Lanya told him, "are a perfect chHd!"
"Fuck you. You want to go put it back?"
"No. Come an.l'!
"Hey," Angel was saying to the young Filipino gatekeeper, "you
want a fuckin' drink? How come they didn't let you up to the paTty?"
"Thank you, no. That's all right-"
'You got Just as much right to a party as we got! You wanna
drink?"
"Thank yon, no. Good night."
"God-danm inotherfuckers! Keep a God-damn gook down here
workin' his ass off all night whUe everybody else is up having a good
time-"
"Come on," Kid said. "I..et's get going. Goon, get oul. Hurry up,
will you."
"Hey, gook; are you from Nam? I was in Nam ... "
"Come on!H
"I was in Nam," Angel said. "We should give him a fuckin' drink!"
As they heroed, blindingly,tbtough the gate, lansang said: "Excuse
me,l've got something for you."
"Huh?" Kid turned.
Palimpsest 643
The brown hand went under the brown lapel for an inside pocket.
"Here." On the envelope's COrner was a small Times masthead. "Mr.
Calkins asked me to give this to you if, by any chance, he didn't get
back before the evening was over."
"Oh.· Kid folded the envelope and slid it into his pants pocket beside Lanya's harmonica.
"What's that?" Lanya asked. Her arm was around Denny's shoulder.
Kid shrugged. "Where's Madame Brown?"
"She left with Everett, a long time ago."
"Oh."
Spider, dragon, newt and waddling bim lit the street.
"Hey, can I have some of that?" Jack the Ripper asked as they
reached the corner.
llSure. You can carry it to."
"Thanks." The Ripper took the bottle, removed the cap, swigged,
and belched. "God damnl" He put the cap back on. "Thatl; good!' He
shook his head like a terrier. "Yeah ... Hey, did you see that old
white guy from Alabama with the bald head? He's supposed to be
some sort of colonel or something ... '
"I saw him,l:1 Kid said. "Didn't meet him. 11
"He's a funny guy, n the Ripper said. "Man, he just loved me.
Wouldn't let me alone the whole God-damn night n
"What'd he want?"
In the glow of shifting beasts, the Ripper smiled down at the bottle.
ur' suck on my big, black dick.'
Kid laughed. "You let him?"
"Shit. n The Ripper wiped the bottle neck with the paler heel of his
hand, then put the cap back on. "If 1 was in Atlanta, I could've got
ten, twenty dollars out of that old guy, you know? Even a steady
thing, you know, where you drop in every couple of.days, pull down
your pants and pick up your pay. It ain't so bad. But around here,
there ain't even any God-damn money or anything, you know?" The
Ripper reached among the heavy links, tucked his shallow chin back
in his neck to look for his shield, found ii, flipped it. " ... But he ain't
so bad," he repeated.
Kid walked beside a raging mantis with swaying rUby eyes.
Watching the walkers among the ballooning lights, Kid realized
that the group was nearly a fourth smaller than the one which had
come up with him. Nightmare's scorpion, on the corner, threw a half
dozen amblers (Baby was the one recognizable) into silhouette.
Listening to their sUent progress down, Kid recalled their boister-
644 Dhalgren
ous journey up. A street lamp pulsed above the corner (they had
passed it before. Where?) and Kid saw the couple, hand in hand, beneath it.
MHeYa you two."
The woman turned, surprised, and raised her free hand: Bracelets
clattered to her pale elbow. She blinked Interrogatively, then smiled.
The man looked over at Kid .. "Hello." He brushed back long hair,
the color of wild rice, from his cheek and smiled toO.
are YOIL supposed to be doing here?"
"Oh, we ... well, we wete at ... your party." Over his doublebreasted jacket, he wore a large lion's-head medallion that, in this
light, looked like metallic plastic. It hung around his neck on a loop
of the optical chain. "We have to get down to Temple, and we jUst
thought we'd walk along with you, for the company."
"liS all right, isn't it?" the woman asked.
"Sure,' Kid said. "You can walk anywhere you fucking well want."
"Um ... thanks," the man said.
"You want a drink?" Kid looked around in the darkness. "Hey.
Ripper, come here!" He took the botde from the tire-colored hands
that jutted from the mantis. "Here, have a drink. We got a long
walk."
MThanks, no, n the man said'. "I don't drink. n
"I do," the woman said and reached out a clinking arm.
"Good.' Kid nodded and gave her the bottle. He left them while
she was still uncapping it, wondering where, over the last rew moments, he had misplaced lanya and Denny.
He heard laughter some twenty feet behind him.
He turned to face the dark; and realized how dark it was.
"You scared?" Denny laughed. "There ain't nothing {o be scared of.·
lanya said: "l'm not seared. Unlike you, I don't believe in ghosts."
Kid turned on his lights.
lanya gave a little shriek and rell into Dennys arms, both of them
blue and helpless with hysterics.
"Are you drunk?" Kid asked.
"No," she said. "I'm not drunk," and began to laugh again.
"She smells like she's drunk," Denny said.
"How would you-" Still laughing, she straightened up and nearly
tripped at the curb.
Which srarted all three of them olI again.
When they were halfway down the next block, Denny asked: "You
like your party?"
Palimpsest 645
"Yeah," Kid said. "I wish I'd gotten a chance to say good night to the
old girl with the crab cakes and the blue hair. She was my favorite."
"Ernestine? Shes priceless!" lanya said. "Where's my harmonica?"
Kid pawed in his pocket. Beside the mouth <lrgan and the envelope, there was grit at the bottom. The metal was so warm on his
hand it might have been artificially heated.
He gave her the harp.
She played three chords, walking beside him, then started some
improvisation in long, platinum notes that took her two, three, rour
steps aheac!.
Denny had turned on his lights (and apparently turned off her
dress). Her back was silver, and as she played she trod the joined
shadows of herself.
Between two notes, something crackled at Kids hip: The envelope.
He pushed thick fingertips intO his pocket to reel the folded edge.
Copperhead, the girl in maroon jeans tucked tightly under his
arm, bobbed into the dim penumbra. "Hey, Kid!" He grinned, broadnosed, freckle-lipped, and bobbed out.
Kid fantasized a conversation: Copperhead, did Mr Calkins ever
hire you to keep people away from his place? I mean, were you
working for him that first day you guys beat me up? No, he didn't
want to knOw.
Jlehind Kid, Angel, Glass, and Priest were in altercation.
"No!" Glass interrupted himself at some request from Dollar.
"What do YOIL want any for? You just got through tellin' uS how it
makes you sick.'
"What I wanna know ... " Angel said, tltickly. "No, wait, man. Let
him have it. Let the dumb white motherfucker get sick if he wants
to-Now; what I want to know is, where do all these niggers come
from?n
"Louisiana,· Priest said, "Mostly. But mere're a lot of guys here
from Chicago. Like you. Illinois, anyway."
I just don't like, Kid thought, the idea of nOt wanting to know anything. He looked around at the luminous dark. "Hey, Copperhead?"
But Copperhead's arachnid, s.:ales bright as the underside of submerged rose leaves sheened with air, ballooned ahead, drifted away.
The legs, rigorous and hirsute, with a faint indigo after-image, deviled Kid's eyes behind sliding striations.
What he'd expected most from {his evening-Information about
Calkins-the whole over-determined matrix seemed bent on denying
him.
646 Dhalgren
A gorgeous bird collapsed near him. Ahead, among a dozen others, a scorpion flickered. Harmonica music was drowned in breaking
glass and laughter: someone had dropped the bottle. The bird ignit"d
again; Kid glanced around to see the pavement glisten.
They exhaust my eyes. My ears are on fire. There is nothing left to
watch but fire and the night: circle within circle, light within light.
Messages arrive in the net where discrete pulses cross. Parametal engines of joy and disaster give them wave and motion. We interpret
and defeat their ,terms by terminus. Tbe night? What of it. It is filled
with bestial watchmen, trammeling the extremities and the inter.
stices ohhe timeless city, portents fallen, constellated deities plum_
meting in ash and smoke, roaming the apocryphal cities, the cities of
speculation and reconstituted disorder, of insemination and inCipience, swept round with the dark.
7
Lights doused, scorpions crowded up the nestS stairs.
He stood on the street, while she laughed sadly: "HeH, then-I
might as well have gone back with Madame Brown-"
He. said: "I just want to check out that place we saw down the
street that was on frre. I'll be right back-"
Gangling D-t hooked one brown arm around Denny's neck, rested
two brown fingers on umya's silver, and said: "I'll take care of 'em for
you, Kid. Now you don't worry."
Denny, looking even sadder, said: "If you go down there, you better be careful ... "
And Kid walked for fifteen minutes,turned one comer, turned another, turned another and thought: If the wind changes, I'll die!
He sqUinted in the heat.
",he smoke! The smoke will be enough to kill me! How did I ... ?"
White fire, a-flap with yellow and orange, engulfed the upper stories. Night roared in the street. He heard something huge fall behind
one of the facades and edged along the brick, thinking: It could jump
the street ...
A flicker between the qlbbles:
As his bare foot touched one, he saw that water, running between
the humped stones, had made all tbe alley a web of light. He sprinted
to the left. Smoke rolled to his right, pulled away from more fire beating up about the high masonry. This was what he bad seen between
Palimpsest 647
the lions of August ... ? This is what they had watched from Calkins'
gardens .•. ?
Not this gorge of flame!
It couldiJ.'t be this big:
Cold puffed against his cheek.
More heat, then cold again; his sweaty jaw dried.
Cool air ran around his bare foot, but the stones under it were
warm.
A hot gust Rapped his vest out; a cold one pushed it back.
Ahead fifty feet stood a figure, black with the fire behind it, dim
with the smoke before.
Oh, Christ, he thought, I can hear them calling me in the crackling aroundKid spun:
The blind-mute's sockets were the perfect hollows of Spalding
halls pressed into dough. The gaunt, brick-haired woman pulled her
coat together and blinked. The heavy blond Mexican, one hand
around her shoulder, the other touching the shoulder of the blindmute, breathed loud as tbe holocaust; meir faces were slathered in
raging copper.
The eyes of the Mexican and the woman were scarlet blanks.
Kid felt his features wrinkle on the bone. His shoulders pulled so
tight the Resh creased between them. The ban of his foot, working
the wet stone, stung.
Nol he thought; he was trying to think: Why?
He remembered ,the warehouse and wondered: Is this terror habit?
Their lids slipped on the glass in lazy blinks: The woman and the
Mexican were ..• watching him! The blind-mute's mouth was open;
his face turned, tilting and tasting the smoke.
The three reached the sidewalkr-now they tumed away-huddled.
Flames-or a dog-barked. A smoky tarpaulin rolled between them.
Kid stepped back, expecting fumes.
But some gust shredded the billow, {ossing off dark fluff. And they
were gone, down some burning alley:
Kid turned and hurried forward
"Hey!" a familiarly mauled voice ahead called. 'Is that you . . . Kid?"
Kid slowed closer.
Shifting bronzes slicked the black face. Uncertain light made it
look (Kid had never thought this before) like there was grey in that
snarled wool. The temples wer. hollow, as on a very thin man, Kid
648 Dhalgrcn
thought; but not like somebody with that iaw, those arms (one sleeve
had been cut from the shoulder of the green shirt, leaving a frayed
rim: The other was just rolled up tight so the voins lay on the
blocked flesh like black twine). "What you doing out here, boy?
Ain't this-" and roade no gesture, but swayed (the orange construction boots wide in the wet net) so that his whole body indicated the
holocaust-"something?" George got his thumbs under his belt to tug
at his canvas pants and laughed "We all been down at the Reverend$
prayer meeting. Now look at it.' Black fingers hit Kids slloulder,
clamped. "Look at it, will you 1"
Kid turned, staring.
"They burned the whole damn thing up tonight."
"What in the ... I mean how did it ... ?"
George tugged Kids shoulder. A few feet ahead, the paving sank
under a puddle like a hole in hellroof. "Niggers done set the whole of
Jackson to burning, don't it look like?" They walked. "AiIi't gal no
water now, when the pipe broke. Shit."
Kid's bare foot struck a tepid pool; it shook like goldleaf.
"You scared?" GeorgeS fingers were hard, hot, and tight. "Nothing
going to hurt you. Look at that burn, burn up like a motherfucker; it's
beautiful, huh? Like walking on the sun." He looked at Kid, his arm
straightening and bending each step. 'The moon get its light from
the sun." He smiled on big, yellow teeth in gums motlled pink and
grey like a dog's. "Get its light from the sun and shine all night. " His
lids narrowed on eyes, blood-webbed and tan. "It burn and it burn
and it don't never stop. It send the folk all down running through the
city of the sun," Or at least that's what Kid thought he said. "Nobody's
here." George looked around. "The niggers aU going to starve to
death. Shit. Everybody going to starve."
Kid's lips were hot. He closed his mouth, his teeth, closed his lips
again because they had come open. "There was this old blaCk
woman," Kid said. They passed a smoking (or was it steaming?)
grate. "She bIoke into the school to steal food. She said there wasn't
any more food in-"
The street sign said:
CUMBERLAND PARK
They passed around. The other extension of the L-shaped sign said:
JACKSON AVENUE
George nodded heavily.
Twenty yaros ahead, a: taB of fire {ell onto the sidewalk.
Palimpsest 649
"What ... " Kid began, "What are you doing here?" while he tried
again to reconstruct the steps coming: D-t had saiduThere may . . . " George's face lined over, straining at reason.
"There may be people In there. We got to go help them.'
"Oh," Kid said with the thought: He's crazy, which is like (with the
afterthought) the pot calling the kettle a rusty son of a bitch.
They walked through the sun.
George was still laughing.
"What ... ?" Kid asked, eXpecting no answer.
George said: "You ain' t scared?"
"r think," Kid said, "if somebody jumped out right now and went
boo, I would shit."
"Watch it," George pushed Kid away, but Kid wasn't sure fTom
which piece of rubbish about them.
I just may live to be an old man, and live through the process called
dying, then I won't be living anymore, no matter what revelations I do
or do not go through here, Kid thought and gTew cold. Artichokes. He
looked up; fire ripsawed the night.
"You think we going to get out of this alive?" George still grinned.
What, Kid wondered, has June got to do with this moment in this
man's life? The fire and her hair are two dilTerent golds. And yet she
circles ... I Kid's eyes went round. "There-I" He pointed. "It isn't
burning down that way! We can go-"
"Boy, there may be people in here, burning up alive!"
'You think there're people?"
'Well, we ain't going to know unless we look."
"Okay," Kid said because there was nothing else to do.
A charred six by six lay across the gutter. Kid stepped over it.
On the cobbles, puddles lay under it, alive and molten.
Water, Kid thought as they walked between two, is molten ice. It
was that hot.
"Hey, Georgel George? ... You hear something up there?"
"Where?'"
The Anathemata:
a plague journal
[We do not know who typed this transcript, nQr if every relevant entry was
included, nor, indeed, the criteria for relevance; Previous publication of
Brass Orchids possibly weighted the decision not tO'include their various
drafts here. (The fate of the second collection we can only surmise.) Generous enough with alternate words, marks of omission and correction, the
transcriber still leaves his accuracy in question: Nowhere in the transcript
is there a fonnal hey.)
it into her shoulder and tore lit! out.
Dragon Lady let go all her breath in some way still not a scream.
Nightmare danced back across the kitchen twisting his orchid, Gerking a little); 8!l1il8Hgftq lhim. I think he was trying to under stand what
he'd done. Dragon herseU ttHHm, cutting for his face and
kicking. (1 k""t Thinking: There's an art to these weapons I
don't begin to understand.)
He fought hilnSeU away, bleeding from the jaw and neck.
She flung herself again. I thought she .,83 te waS geiBg-te
!would/be impaleld).
Her white jeans were bloody to the knee. A good deal of the blood
waS his.
651
652 Dhalgren
Copperhead, flke.it in delayed reaction, said, "Hey ... " with a voice
I'd never heard: he was scared to death.
Raven, Thruppence, and D-t hit the doorway [and) one .... IBetl
anothe[r), peering, over eeeft one another's shoulders. (Thinking: I
used to break up Dollar's scumes, but I would no more get into this
than chop off my thumb.) ..
Nightmare flailed backward out the screen door, H his forearm!
goingi HlolS..g 8 crache<H:he on the jamb.
Everybody poured after them-somebody knocked something off the
sink. I heard a garbage bag fall and tear under someone's boots. Two of
Horsing around in the yard with Nightmare.
Raven. Filament. and Glass, tripped and
scratched my calf on the edge of the steps.
Later, Lanya came into the loft and saw me.
"Hey, n she said. "You should put something on
that. Don't play with it that way. You've practically rubbed it raw. You don't want it to get infected."
the little boys (Woodard and Stevie) were
holding hands and
butting their shoulders against each other,
Rose, the youngest
(seven?), and brightwas right up
there trying to see with everybody else. She went through the door
with me.
Dragon [Lady)._ snappittged her own bladed fIst back and forth lIS
though her arm were a whip. (Her elbow dripped. Nightmare spun away:
gravel chattered against the bottom step. Drops splatted the ground
The sky gleamed dun as zinc.
llooked up at the alley-thinking: You can't leven! see the end,
when Thirteen Came hurrying out of the mist. He stopped twenty reet
away, Smokey and Lady of Spain behind •• \1;"." ol'41h him.
Dragon Lady staggered, swayed-I thought she'd tripp.d.
But she shook her head, hard, gave a tiny cry, turned; and fled dew..
up the street .
. Smokey colUded with Thirteen. Lady of Spain stepped back.
Nightmare stood, panang, both arIllS going wide and around, getting back his breath.
Among his chains, the optical one caught light. At first I thought it
was lengthening ... Broken, it slipped across his stomach and
coiled IBsae·a tinkling! tlliatlle 13et¥l£etlfttS {eet' Beside his Beet I
against his boot where the sole had pulled off the upper. Not seeing,
he lurched away. The chain slipped half over the turbo
Thirteen caught lH!l8FIft him, ·You're all right ... 1" and staggered
with him.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 653
Behind me the door creaked; two people had gone back in.
"You come on with me,:II Thirteen said, l'noW' you just tome on.:II
Back in the living room, California was looking at the wall by the
door. He'd pulled all his hair in (rant of his shoulder and was sort of
hanging on it. "Jesus Christ," he said. "Will you look at that. I mean,
Jesus Christ. where she splattered when she went through.' He
started to touch one of the dime-sized spots, ab;eady £hieEl Bf8 "'ft dry,
but site.!' !tis went back to hanging on his hair. "II mean,! Jesus.'
Raven, Copperhead, and Cathedral carne in frowning at the constellations of her blood, 'hat kel't eft geiftg
'You See rhe way she went at that motherfucker,' Pepper said Somewhere out in the hall "r thought she was gonna hill him. I wouldn't
blame her, man. I wouldn't blame her one bit the way that motherfucker done. Did you seethe way they were going after each other,
man? I never seen anything like that before in my life. I really thought
we was gonna have chopped meat for dinner the way he lit into her
with tfte5ethat orchid, man, I really thought. .. "
I went back [into) the kitchen.
Rose was looking out the screening, a brown fIst up beside her ieee
chin. I went up behind her and looked too. The other four children
were outside.
Sammy was standing at the place where the curb cracked away into
the street. With the toe of his sneaker, he touched the coil of Noghtmare's chain.
Stevie, who was Sitting on the steps, stood up.
Sammy started to pick up the chain.
Stevie said, "Don't you touch that, niggerl"
Marceline laughed, but I don't think at that.
Sammy le.!.ell tIj! ... 11 looked embarrassed, went to pick up a board
lying out on the street, and played by himself.
I touched Rose on the shoulder and she jumped.
"Don't you want to play with the other kids outside?"
She just blinked. (Somebody should do something about the IoI&ek
spade confUSion of her hair-cut it short, I guess.) 'Ffteft She went out
and sat on the steps as far away from the others as she could get.
Only Stevie and Marceline are really friends. Woodard (who is sort
of mustard colored, both his skin and his wooly top) merely hangs
around them.
I feel sorry for them all.
Later that evening. i using a piece of pine plank for a writing board,
654 Dhalgren
I Iwent outtol steps land! was "eFlftng eft playing in...,.
a poem. I had been there perhaps two hours when I noticed the chain
/wasI ftsEllJeen: MB' ea. gone.
I sat a few minutes more. Then I went inside.
Just after Denny went out this morning, Lanya brought back my note.
book-this one. The first thing I did was look inside the front COVet.
"What about the new poems?" I asked.
"Since they're all on loose sheets I decided I'd keep them in my desk
drawer. If you want them ..• 1"
"No," I told her. "That8['?)s probably better. They'd just fall out."
"Did you see the article lin the Times! about you and the children?"
[slhe asked when we. went out into the back yard.
uNo/' I said.
So she told me.
It made. me feel strange.
Once we went back lupl into I into the loft! to get something. She
found a piece of paper down _!between! the wall and the mattress.
"Are you frnished with this one?"
I looked at it. "I guess so. It isn't complete, really. But I'm not in·
terested in it any more.:n
"I'll just take it back to my place and keep it with the others," and
. she put it in her [_?) shirt pocket; then she jumped down, cried out
when [she?) landed, "Owwwwl"
I thought she'd twisted her ankle.
But it wasil' t serious.
We went into the kitchen; she looked into the coffee pail on the
stoVe and frowned at the mess.
D-t came in wit!h a paper. "Hey; man, thats something, huh?" He
had it folded back to the article.
It was on page three.
"What I want to know," Lanya said, looking through the living room
door at Stevie and Woodard (Tarzan was trying to ride them acrosS the
1I0or like a horsie), "is what you're going to do with them."
I ;. e leatliBg I was leaning against the Jiefrigerator door With
my fIDgers hook"a .... ",,!ling at the rubber lIange that goes around the
inside 8£ the-tieel'. "It doesn!t even mention George.n I ¥f'RS
"It makes it sound like I saved them all by myself. It was GeorgeS Goddamn idea. I was just along-"
Rose walked in, banging the screen, and stared at Lanya on her way
The Anathilmata: a plague journal 655
to the next room. Lanya smiled: Rose didn't and kept walking. At the
doorway she stopped, looked at Tarzan and the boys, sighed, turned
around, went back-bang!-onto the front steps.
Sammy was playiog in the middle of the street and did not look at her.
D-t moved the junk aside on the table (Marceline in the room with
T3:rzan was calling out, "Let me! Let me . .. ! Come on, let me!") and
sat on the up-ended milk crate to read the article to us. The crate was
so low the table top hit him just below the tit. tHe read the part about:
" ... Iduring the holocaust, broke into a wooden frame house adjoining a grocery store already in lIames and let out five youngsters trapped
in ,the second floor rear bedroom. It is reported the bedroom door had
been clumsily secured by the back of a chair beneath the door knob-"
"It wasn't a chair," I said. 'Somebody had taken a fucking piano
bench and turned it on its end. The God-damn music had fallen out
all over the hall rug. Why doesn't it mention George?"
"Sound[s?) like you had a reporter standing right there watching
you, n D-t said.
HftiEl "There wasn't anybody," I said. A piece of rubber pulled free,
only 1 dropped it and couldn't See where it had fallen between the refrigerator and the sink. "Just George."
"The[n) how did they know to write about it?"Lanya asked.
"I don't know," I said. "George actually got the door open. All I did
was yank at the legs. The bench catne open and all the music fell Out .
On the rug. The top of the bench was still jammed up in there."
"Maybe George met a reporter later that evening," Lanya said. "He
could have told the papers, Kid.'
"' ... The children are reported to be safe, but we do not know .. .'"
·Of coUTSe it doesn't sound like George tn cut himself out."Lanya
sighed and made a funny tnovement with her hand, grinding her palm
on the greyn(?) formiCa. "Oh, Kid ... "
IttsiEle Tarzan neighed lOUdly and Woodard\; hiccuppy laugh shrilled
above it, covered in turn by Marceline\; squeal.
"The real question-" Lauya looked up-"is what are you going to
do with them. Are you going to keep them here[?)"
"You're out of your fucking head-" I said.
D-t said, "The guys like them-"
"How many days was it?" 1 said. "How many days ago, Nightmare and
dragon {sic) Lady almost murdered each other? Look!" I went to the living room door. "There's blood all over the fucking God-damn wall-!'
Fist against his chin, Stevie was looking at me.
656 Ditalgrm
Tarzan had sat back on his heels and, concertedly, wasn't.
"Ride mel" Marceline said. "You rode Woodard before. Now you
rideme!1t
"Yeah,' Woodard said. "You ride her now."
1 stepped back into the kitchen.
"What are you going to do with them?"
I told her, "1 don't know."
Tarzan neighed again.
Three staples On the bottom of the
above page hold a creased rectangle
of newsprint. The end of the colulnn
has either been ripped off or (the bottom is tom On a second crease) han.
died so frequently it had comt away:
BRASS ORCHIDS
BLOOM BENEATH
A CLOUDED SKY
This handsome book, or rather booklet, has already become a
Bellona commonplace, on night-llibies by the reading lamp, in
the back pockets of youngsters in the park, or tucked, along with
the Times, under the arlllS of people going about the city. This reviewer only wonders how OUr anonymous author achieved such
vivid visualizations with such simple language. Before subject
matter SO violent and so yet so clearly and Wittily
voiced, few familiar with Bellona's landscape will be able to avoid
strong reactions, negative or positive. If the poet's own emotions
seem disjointed or strange, they are still expressed pointedly, in·
cisively, and in an jliltensely human mode.
True anonymity in a situation such as we have here is,
of course, impossible. Since the interview with the author
we: pllblished a while back, many have simply held it an
open secret that the: cultivator of these brazen blooms is actualThis morning I climbed out ofthe loft soon.as 1 woke up. When fd
gone to bed, they'd been laid out neatly on Raven's sleepililg bag he'd
opened liP £ul1 for them by the couch:
The Anathemata: a plague journal 657
Woodard was curled on his side a yard off the edge. Rose had two
fingers fMeet through a tear in the plaid lining. A tuft of stuffmg that
had corne /halfJ out shook with her sleeping breath. Sammy, Marceline,
and Stevie were baaked against Copperheads back. wfte For some reason /he! had gone to sleep On the floor beside them.
I got fIIem the kids up nOisily (when we were ready to leave, Copperhead had rolled the bag around himself, head out one ead, boots
out the other, and wedged under tha couch; there was a tuft of stuffing
caught On his beard) and took them to the school.
I pushed the door open aRd herded them inside. Lanya was doing
something with the tape-recorder and looked up, more startled than
I'd thought she'd be.
"Nobody else here, yet?" 1 asked.
"Christ, you surprised me.' She pushed the fast (forward? reverse?)
button. Things clacked, crackled, and spun.
"1 brought the kids.'
Rose went and immediately sat on a chair in the corner. Woodard
wandered toward thellible.
Marceline said to Stevie, ·You cut that out," only I wasn't sure latl
what [he'd done].
"The other kids will be in soon,» Lanya said.
1 said: "Good. What you have to do is when the parents Corne
for the kids in the afternoon, you have to farm these here out to
them."
Lanya stood up fully and faced me. "God damn!"
"1 can't keep them," I said. "1 told you that. •
She pulled he< lips thin and looked angry.
I was surprised that I had been expecting her to be just that way
about it.
"What am 1 going to do with-Yeah, 1 know what you said."
Stevie said sharply: "You better keep your hands off that, nigger!"
Woodard turned efHfte from the fIIt>e recorder, holding a spool of
IlIpe gingerly, blinking apple green eyes below his brush of mustard
wool. He smiled uncertainly.
Rose began to cry. The knuckll'$ of her .fist pressed together. Her
chin bobbed, sobbing, and tealS tracked from the inner and outer corners of both eyes.
Sammy, stimding by the far wall, ....,..."yturned! the toe of
his sneaker _Ion! the floor and blinked.
658 Dhalgren
How absurdThe following letter is papercIipped to the top and side of the page on which the next entry begins. The en- velope, stuck beneath, has left its out. line on the stationery:
-to apologize for an uncommitted injury. But I shall not have
been at your party tonight-if Lausang delivers this. There is
nothing less sympathetic than the vulgar pleading extenuating
circumslances for Iheir vulgarity. There is nothing more distressing to a man who admires formal honesty than to discover
he can only offer "personal reasons" as honest explanation for
his breach of form.
But, for personal reasons, I will not have altended your party
when you read thi$. I am distressed.
I have been rude.
And I have often imagined that to be the most terrible admission I might ever have to make.
Forgive me.
It is not much consolation that the powerful are most successful as palrons when least in evidence. l am concerned with
what I presumptuously consider my City. I have always felt every
society must have its art; and for that art to have ultimate use, it
must be free of intimidation from the centers of power.
Therefore I have not read yoUl' poems. Nor will l.
Were I less gregarious, or Bellona more populous, I could be
content to read them and never meet you. But I am a very social
being, and Bellona is the social size it is.
We will meet.
And 1 eagerly await your second collection, whenever it should
be ready. Its publication, hopefully, will be as expeditious as publication of your first.
My friend, I am fascinated by the mechanics of power. Who
in his right mind would want the problems and responsibilities
of the nation's president? Lord, 1 would! I would! But one cannot
be president with a Jewish grandmother. A millionaire fam.ly
with connections at Harvard helps. A moderately wealthy one
with strong emotional ties to Wooster (paint-thinner manufacturers in Cleveland) can be a downright nuisance.
The Anathemata: a plagoe journal 659
Shall I twist the knife?
A degree in corporate law from Yale is one thing; one in
patents from N.Y.U. (cum laude, 1960, and still two tries at the
New York bar. Personal reasons again ... ? The pain!) is something else again.
I ramble.
More than likely I shall not be at the house for a while.
Until we do meet, I remain yours,
Sincerely,
Roger Calkins
RC;wd
tOO dark to see.
So got up, stretched, put down my plank, went inside-and was
suddenly bellowing and yelling and laughing, and everybody was pouring in to see what was going on: "Night run!' I told them. "We're gonna
make a night run!"
Which we did-to
the building with the
stained glass windows (the lions of
the city, a parti-colored flicker from our
lights) with !.anya
along, mouse quiet;
and there was a funny almost-fight with
three men on the
street. But after they
got as nasty as they
dared, I guess it
struck them how
stpud [stupid?l they
were being; a couple
of .Hmes they got
pushed into a waH,
though.
At the nest, Dell1l¥
filled up a bottle
from the pail on the
I heard Denny say: "He's asleep."
I opened one eye against my arm. The MAe.
s>afe€/ With the other I could see the top of the
doorway, 1=keR ReF Then steps below. / and
somebody moving something to get by I were
Lanya['s!. I lay waiting for the circle of her hair to
dawn at the loft's edge.
"You aren't sleeping." She grinned and came
on over. "I got all the kids stored away."
"Good," I said. "Why were you so' pissed off
at me when I' brought them in that morning?"
"What?"
I raised my head out of my arm and asked
again.
"Oh.· She turned around' on the edge and
slid her butt against my side. "I'm just lazy-al.
most, but not quite, as lazy as you. And I don't
like imposing on people. " She put her hand in
the sleeve hole of my vest. "Besides, I thought
you shOUld have kept them." Her fingers, cool,
_ tOUched the chain.
"You did?"
She nodded.
That upset me. '1 really misunderstood you."
"I' know you did. I read what you wrote I said
about it in, the kitchen / about / when D.t
brought ,in, the article."
660 Dhalgren
stove; I took it on
the pooch and wrote
some more.
Lanya came to
squat behind me,
hands on my shoulders, cheek On my
cheek. ["lYou're really "t'/goingl aren't
you? Maybe staying
at my place wasn't
such a bad idea?"
"It was a good
idea.1t
She said, sweetly:
"I, waS fucking pissed, you know, wh.n
Madame Brown told
me you'd split, But
when I got here and
everybody said you
were writing, it was
okay." She picked up
the sheaf of blue
paper. "I'm going to
steal these away to
read. I'll bring them
back in twenty minutes. All right?"
"Yeah," I said.
"You know I feel better about these than
any I've written before. Not that that
meaUS anything,'
"Good enough to
have a second collection?"
I grinned at her.
"I think I'm even
"And that's not what you said at all, huh?"
"What I said was: What are you going to do
about them? What arrangements were you
going to make about getting them over to the
school, if any; getting a couple of changes of
clothes for them; maybe a permanent mattress
that was theirs-things like that."
'You 'really think they'd be better off here?"
"Where you found them, somebocly was trying to burn them alive. I could always pack them
off with the Richards-"
'What about some of the black families of
the kids
you've got?"
"You have a very funny picture of this city, n sl:le
said. "There aren't any black f.amilies here. Some
of my kids hang around the George Harrison citcus.
Or whoever will put up with them. Some, as
far as I can tell, are completely on their own,"
"Where did you park them?"
UWith the commune, mostly. n
Ilay back down. "They would have been better off here."
uMmm," agreed. "Rose went with a,
woman
who's been keeping three girls for a couple of weeks. Everybody was pretty nice abollt
it: Her fingers moved. "But you should have
kept them."
I tolled over on my back.
Her hand dragged around my stomach,
"1 didn't want them."
"Maybe somebody else BFBI::IRS hepe in the
nest would have. Everybody liked them ... I
wanted them."
"You don't tive here," I said. "'Except five
days out of a week. And you've got them: in
school .. "
"Yeah," shesaid. "Five days out of a week.
But you have a point." She took her hand away.
"Tell me, how do you do it?"
I asked: "What?"
"How do you-well, I was just thinking about
the article."
"Have YOIl heard people talking aboutrny article?"
" ... yours?" That her smile held less mocking
than ,it might was how I knew she mocked.
JlAbout me. You know what I, mean."
more anxious not to
haveone.n
She shook her head,
kissed me, went away
with them.
Wrote till I was finished; found her reading in the front room,
dragged her off to the
.IeH loft where Denny
was lying down already; we fucked on
and off all night. Slept.
Woke up before they
did. Took all the pages
I'd done out on the
kitchen steps and in
dawnlight almost too
dim to read by, read
them: made six more
changes. Now they are
finished. Copied them
out (and it was full
day) but found I still
[wanted?] to go on
Writing. So turned back
to one of the pages
with space left near the
end of the notebook
(there are very rew of
them, and I have just
started pUlling entries-like the beginning of this one-in
The Anathemata: a plague journal 661
"Funny ... " She drew her feet up crosslegged I wrinkling f .... the blanket; "last
night at the bar people were talking about
you-as usual. But they didn't spend too
much time on the kids' rescue. It jars with
your image, I think."
I thought about that.
She explained: "It isn't two-sided enough
for you. It's just straight heroics."
I heard Denny come inot'[into?l the room,
move things under the loft looking for something and not find[ing?] it-lanya glanced
down-and leave[ing?].
"All the good gossip about you usually
'has that dualistic two·sided thing of being
bad' and good at once-do you worry about
your image?" she asked, suddenly.
"Sure."
"I'm surprised, " she said. uYou never
seem to purposely do anything about it."
"That's because it never has any relation
to what I actually do do. My image is in other
peoples' heads. Keeping it interesting is
there {their?] problem. I worryabotA it in the
way I could worry abput the reputation of my
favorite baseball team. I don't for one minute
think of myself as a player."
"Maybe so." She picked up my hand and
touched the / thickened thumb·knuckle I'd
gnawed I raw /...epink again. "I, mean some
day you're going to wash your hands thoroughly and show up with a perfect manicure.
And I'll leave you forevet. You really are schiz,
you know?"
Which ,made me laugh. "I' just it [?] the article had mentioned George. I don't think We
leaving him out is-" I'd started to say
fair-"good for my image." Which made me
laugh again.
quarter-sized, near illegible scrawl all over the margins) and wrote this,
continuing it on a page I found free here near the beginning.
I .ecalY and wanrl this .. &1lI'iHg:
Swinging up into the cab of a truck, miles north of Florida, and the
662 Dhalgrrn
driver asking how long you've been hi tc hing. and the sunlight fills his
lime-splattered lap and your rank jeans and he lets the radio play POll
music fo r a while, for a while country; then twists the dial; your £Oleaxm burns on !he • .f the door, your hair snaps and yoI\)'
cheek freezes, and the motion is spindled on the rush of music. So you
sit, just breathing, to hear and to move through the red and green country, with the sun in the tree-tops a stutter of bright explosions.
The City sulfers from the lack ofit,
Blit most of US /hovel come hete by way of it.
[Here the correction marks-except for on. entry further on-stop. Did
our transCriber tire of IImateur scholarship? What he has given is mOn!
frustrating t/lall helpful. And the sensitive reculer will wish with us that he
hcul annotated the fil1al, rather than the first, few pages; there ar. half a
dozen passages to come where even these attempts at variora might be
preferable tQ themQstinjormedsupp<>sitiOn, As tothemarks employed: indicatiolls of authorial deletions are self-evident; we can assume brackets
mean editorial conjecture. The bracketed question mark, however, with or
without additional word or suffix, seems totally arbitrary. After much debate, we can ono/ suggest that wolds in virgules <Ire pmbably interlinear
cu1ditions; but even the quickest perusal reveals this accounts only for mast
cases. While he plies lIS with quaint desCriptions oJpaperclips and staples,
hefail$ to record date and lctterhtcul material in the Calkins letter (perhaps therew.re nont), Mr does he mention whether any (or all) of the entries were typed or liandwritten. Inlernal evidence (it is a spiral notebooh,
not a loose-lea]) suggests the latter. Corrections, hQwever, such as balnk
Iblank?], That8['?]s, and bendh [bench?] bray outfor the former. Also,
"Rose. , . a brawn fist up beside her chin ... " and, It few pages later,
"Fist against his chin, Stevie. , ." suggest the first draft of a fabulist who,
havingfoulld the sharp descriptfor one invented character,forgets he has
already IISed it and sticks it to a second. The rubrics running page left or
right, which we print in slightly smaller type, are marginal (sometimes
Tather wide) entries made along the sides of our typescript at somewhat
narruwer spacing; most pmbably they represent "entries in quarter-sized,
near illegible scrawl all over the margins" _hat is, entries of a later date
than the one beside them we print in ordinary sized typeface. (Note also
that the rubric which breaks off marginally to the last entry in the notebook continues as the major entry just two previollS to this.) Considering
the Iizcunae that pass Without (lUt transcriber!; editorial adieu
The Anathemata: a plague journal 663
("Here one page, possibly two, is missing.") can only mak. us wonder
what maddeningly special knowledge convinced him that, indeed, the ultimate and penultimate fragments once formed a break less, breathless
whole. Of course, we do not know under what pressure the transcript was
made. Even if the description of conditions in the closing pages is only half
true (and our transcriber were-say_he enthusiastic
E. Forrest, workingwithin the City), we can easily see his abandoning that tedious opening method to the simple necessity of completion; we must count ourselves
lucky to have any document at all. For all we know, however, we have here
a copy of a transcript made from the original hand-written notebook; or
even a typescript made fmm a manllScript copy. Both mistakes or correction-marks might have come in (or fallen out) at any generation. Still, it
tempers our trust of all he has done to note that on one page (!) he has
committed all of the follOWing:
"Sound[s?] like you had a reporter standing
"The [n] how did they know
grinding her palm on the grey[n]? formica. (That superfluous 'n'
again suggests a typing, rather than a hand-written, errqr.)
Are you going to keep them here[?]"
He then has the pedantic gall to impose his solitary 'sic'- Nightmare
and dragon [sic] u.dy almost muraered each other-for the mere lack
of an upper-case 'D'!]
We coagulate and dissolve around (not inside) the house, gathering on
the front steps, dispersing for booze to the store with the busted plateglass window two blocks away, convening again outside the kitchen
door, drifting away-to reconnoiter in the yard (piling up the bottles),
with maybe a stop in the front room which u.nya, when she comes
around, says smells like a locker room-curious if she's ever been in a
locker room, or just picked up the phrase.
I can't smell it.
This afternoon when I came out into the yard, Gladis (very black
and very pregnant, she wears a baskelball sized natural, sandals, and
bright colored slacks) and her friend Risa (who 1 wished looked like
something other than a chocolate cow) were there for the third day:
The guys' jokes are foul, their attitude maniacally proteclLve.
Jack the Ripper: "Little girl, you must have been fucking a Goddamn elephant to get yourself a belly that bigl" at which Denny,
perched on the tableS edge, laughs the shriYest.
664- Dhalgrtn
Gladis, under Spider's arm, wriggles back against the tree where
they sit.
The Ripper's laughter slaps for the wine jug, and continues when
he drops it from his mouth to pass it to Thruppence and Raven, knee
to knee on the bench below Denny (I propped the board with a cinder_
block yesterday).
Gladis leers and says, 'Puck you-" She's fifteen? Sixteen-?-·you
big cocksucker!" with the inappropriateness with which women usu.
ally appropriate homosexual vocabulary or whites use "nigger" other
than in rage.
Thruppence came back over the laughter with good-natured illOgic:
·You dOn't get no belly like that sucking a cockl"
"Well, Jesl'lS Christ," Spider shouted!, ·well, jesus Christ, if
known that-" making much to get his fly open and free hand inside.
Gladis squealed to her feet and lurched away.
I sat down on the steps next to Risa wh" closed her copy of Orchids,
leaned On ,the faded knee of her jeans, and didn't look at me.
Tattan was going by with the wine jug and handed it to one of the
other white guys (an occurrence notable enough to note); I reached
way down till my knees Were higher than my shoulders and snagged it
up into my lap. 'You like that?" I asked Risa.
When she looked up, I put my arm around her shol'llder and offered
her some wine. She made her first, scared smile (she looks a few years
older than Gladis, anyway: eighteen? maybe twenty?) and drank. Inside the up-ended jug, wine splashed like a small, plum sea.
"Uh-oh,' from the Ripper. "What your girl friend gonna say when
she come around?:!)
"Fuck her," I said.
"What's his boy friend gonna say?" Dollar asked from somewhere
else.
ISaid: "Fuck him too."
Denny leaned across the table to pull the other jug over.
Gladis, turning and turning in her loose green (they regard her as
their personal catastrophe, an awesome delight; she looks as if she will
foal now; claims, howe"er, it's months away), settled, giggling, again,
beside Spider.
Then Spilt came in wirhGlass (some argument about where a build!-
ing was) and we broke up from our backyard loafing reconvened
on (he front steps. Slanding beside Copperhead, I looked down the
street. Thirteen was coming up:
The Anathemata: a plague journal 665
"Hey!" called with the desperate good will of the seriously bored.
"Any of you guys want to come on over? Hey, Kid, you ain"teven seen
my new place. You want to come over and meet some of the guys
there?" In this city, where nothing happens, it is worth your sanity to
refuse anything new.
Somehow, with the wrangling and wine and lethargy, me, the national guard (Copperhead, Spitt, and Glass), and Denny went with him.
Upa lot of dark stairs with Glass saying, "Man, I didn't know you
were this close. You're just around the Goo-damn corner," and Thir·
teen saying: "I told you I was just around the God-damn corner; why
ain't you guys naver Come over to see us?" and I looked up:
Smokey stood at the head; when we broke around her, she turned
4t isn't that the "heroic" incidents about me cui·
lable from the Times are untrue (well ... some
of them), nor the "lfillainous" ones on the gossip round that distorted (well ... ditto), But the
six minutes here, the twenty seconds there, the
forty-five minutes how-many-weeks later-the
real time it takes to commit the "heroie R or "vii·
lainous" act-are such a microscopic percentage of my life. Even what can be synopsized
from this journal-snatches gun from looter's
handsl helps save children from flaming death;
lead victorious attack (Ha! They were scared
crazy!) on armed citadel; hobbles, half-shod,
shrieking in the street; rescues Old Faust from
collapsing ruin (and once tried to write poems-
) are things that have happened to me, not that
I have done. What you look like you're doing
and what you feel like you're doing are disparate enough to mute any mouth that might
attempt description!
with Thirteen, to
follow (at his shoulder) breathing as
though she'd held
her breath since he'd
left.
Sitting on one of
the beds at the end
of the loft was a
scrawny shirtless guy
in jeans-holes both
knees - knuckling
his eyes. He'd proba.
bly just sat up when
he heard us on the
stairs.
Two olher guys
stooo at tbe window.
Thirteen started bobbing around, very excited: "Hey! Hey, you guys, !his
is the Kid. Hey!" He motioned me over.
"Hi." A black guy in workman's greys got up off the window sill and
held out his hand.
His friend, a stocky blond (short-hair) in denim and construction
boots, had his hand ready for seconds. "Hear you got a thing going
The black guy locked thumbs with me in a biker shake.
I figured the other guy would do the same. But he just started, tben
he laughed, and his hand joggled awkwardly. So I caught it up for him
666 Dhalgren
and smiled. He was "Tom," from Thirteen, "and this is Mak You guys
rode in here, you say?"
"In a pickup," Tom explained. "We were up in Montana, running
down this way ... ,(ill we run out Qf gas." A cowboy truck driver, he
wanted to be friendly.
"And thats Red," from Tom.
So I locked thumbs with Red (hair like rusted Brino), who blinked
sleepy, ice-grey eyes in a face dark as mocha-another mustardskinned spade, and this one, for all his hunched shoulders, good-look_
ing as the devil.
From the corner someone said: "Hello, Kid," and Tak, arms folded, stood up from the plank wall where he was leaning. He pushed his
cap up and came forward, face visible from the pink crease On his forehead where his cap had been, down to his gold chin. "I'm making my
rounds again. I brought these guy.s here over to the commUne and ,they
felt about like you did. So 1 thought we'd drop in on Thirteen and say
hello."
"A good excuse to smoke dope," Thirteen said. "Now ain't that a
good excuse?"
"Sure," Tom said. "Any excuse is a good excuse as far as I'm concerned."
Smokey. whom 1 hadn't seen go, came back with the jar.
Thirteen took it, raised it in his tattooed hand. "Now you'd think,·
he said, "with a water pipe like this, I'd at least put some kind of water
in. it, huh?"
·Or creme de menthe," SmOkey said. "That's what you're alway.s
talking about."
"Yeah. You ever smoke hash through a water pipe filled with creme
de menthe?" Thirteen asked. "That's really something."
Mak, still at the window, gestured toward the bed. "You got a bottle
of ..• what's ,that? Mountain Red?"
"Naw," Thirteen said. "That ain't the same thing."
Thirteen's cheeks hollowed; the jar filled with smoke.
"You got any speed?" Tom asked.
'Oh, man-" Thirteen coughed and handed Red the jar. ·You can't
keep anything like ,that around here more'n five minutes. We don't get
much anyway. Once somebody brought in a whole pillowcase fuH,
man! A whole pillow case with a plasticlining full ofallsort. of speed.
Tbis Mexican guy."
"Was he Mexican?" Smokey asked. "He was thick-set, blond •.• "
The Anathemata: a plague journal · 667
"He talked like a Mexican," Thirteen said. "I mean that was a Mexican accent he was speaking. It wasn't no Spanish-from-Spain accent.
Or Puerto Rican. They sound different."
1 nodded.
"Anyway," Thirteen said, "it was gone like that!" He grinned back
across his shoulder. "She was maybe five pounds lighter. B"t that's the
only way you'd of known it was here. How we went through all that
shit so fast-man!:II
"You must have every kind of-Oh, thanks." Mak took the pipe
from Red, sucked, and said: "Itl; out."
"Here, just a minute." Thirteen struck another match.
"You must have every kind of junkie in this city," Mak said.
Smokey, with the jar now, was handing it to Copperhead, who said:
"I don't think I've ever seen a skaghead in BeHona, you know?"
"I 1I I said.
Glass laughed.
Taksaid: "We don't have much dope here. No money, no dope. To
speak of, I mean."
"I think-" Thirteen said. "Wouldn't you say, Kid? I mean, you
could say this about most of yo"r guy.s, huh? Most people here have
tahen a lot of dope. But we don't got too many people here who need
it. If you know what I mean."
"That sounds pretty good,' Mak said.
"I mean if you need it," Thirteen said, "there just ain't no place to
get it. I've put everything in my arm, or up my nose, or down my belly
I could,just about, one time or another. Liked all ofll, too. But I don't
need anything, you know? Of course-" he reached over and took the
jar from me-"1 do enjoy my toke."
Everybody laughed.
Me too.
And all the smoke loosed out my nose and stung.
"Now did you ever think what a specialized city Bellona is?" Tak
was saying. He had come in front of the bed, fists in his scuffed pockets, holding the leather off his hairy stomach. The red quilt lining was
tom in twO places. "I mean Bellona's got a lot of some things and none
of a lot of others. I used to know a guy who could not go to sleep unless he had a radio playing. He can't live in Bellona. There are people
who have to have movies to go to; or they get twitchy. They can't live
in Bellona. Some people must have chewing gum to survive. I've found
stale candy bars, Life-Savers, Turns; but all the chewing gum is gone
668 . Dhalgren
from all the candy-stores' racks. Gum chewers can't live in Bellona.
Not to mention cigarettes, cigars, pipes: the tobacco in the vending
machines went SIal. a couple of weeks after we got cut olI and 1 guess
the ear tons and packaged shag was the first thing the scavengers
cleared out You never see a smoker in Bellona.'
"Some people need sun, clear nights, cool breezes, warm days-' I
said
"They can't live in Bellona," Tak went on. "in Helmsford, 1 knew
people who never walked further than from the front door to the car.
They can't live in Bellona. Oh, we have a pretty complicated socid
structure: aristocrats, beggars-'
"Bourgeoisie," I said.
"-and Bohemians. But we have no economy. The illusion of an ordered social matrix is complete, but it's spitted through on all these
cross-cultural attelets. It is a vulnerable city. It is a saprophytic cityIt's about the place I've ever lived." He grinned around at
T<)rn, Red, Mark. "{'m curious to see whether you guys will like it
enough to seltle down, make it your home, become part of the community.OJ
Thejar.circled Tak forthe third time; he swayed at the center.
"Here." Tom, still leaning on the sill, held it out. 'You didn't get
any'n
"Never touch the stuff.· Tak waved the sides of his jacket. "No, I'm
a poor, anti-social juice-head. Not a man of my times at alL Gets me in
,trouble, 100.'
Somebody suggested we go back to the nest. Tal<, his three discoveries pretty well parked at Thirteen's curb, decided to drift-after
Thirteen, in a flurry of patriarchal pOlitesse, broke out his jug (same
as ours; he must be rifling the same busted plate glass window on the
street sometimes marked Lafayette, sOmetimes marked Jessie). The
late afternoon got lost in the day's momentum.
"Why don't we go hack to {he nest,' somebody suggested again.
Which, again, everybody thought was a good idea.
Where Lady of Spain. with Raven, I guess it was, had gotten a big
Hre gOing in the yard and allsor{S of canned shit, scalloped tops bent
back, bubbling on the cinderblocks, their labels blacked and bronzed
by the flames. The tTUnks glimmered; and the fence; and the triangle of glass second floor window of the house beyond.
We stood around,listening to the fire. Red, still barefoot and shirtless, squatted, staring at the coals, the back of his jeans tugged way the
The Anathemata: a plague journal 669
hell down his ass. Circling his hips three times-he wore it down
below the waist of his jeans so you couldn't see it normally-was tbe
optic cbain.
Just thea he glanced back at m4<)ver his shoulder, surprised; maybe
he thought I was staring at his crack.
"God damn, I burned fuckin' hell out of myself-in Jack the Ripper
shook his hand furiously on the other side of the fire, hopped and
whirled, Fire glistened in his mud and sputum eyes.
1 looked down at the beads across my chest, my stomach, around
my arm; could feel them around my leg. I looked up and saw Red was
looking too; then bis eyes went down to the place below bis hips blade
pushing above the beltless loops. And up at me again. His hands, out
for balance, were bloated the way some wino's get. He started to speak.
I said: "I don't want to hear it. I don't want to know where you got
it. I don't want you {a ask me wberel got mine. Fuck you, man. I j1ilst
don't want to hear-" calching my voice lowering and a fury rising
neither he nor I undeIStood.
Black Mak watcbed me, frowning.
White Tom dug in a can of beans (bot on one side and cold on the
other?) with his fingers.
Red swallowed.
"Sure I eat pussy!" California shouts and sboves Tarzan backward.
"Hey, man, hey-" D-t moves along with theUL
·You God-damn right I eat pussy!' and shoves again.
"Come ont now. man, what you-"
"I'd eat your fucking pussy if you had one!" and Tarzan crashes
back into the fence.
"Now come on!" D-t, a hand on either of California's shoulders,
moves him away, and Tarzan, abandoned, suddenly starts to-
-but Gladis's laugh turned shriek, letting me hear (remember?) a
second crash's echo. Among all the concerned "Whats ... " and
"Who's ... " and unconcerned laughter (mostly Dollar's, bright and insistent), it got figured out tbat somebody had hurled a hot can at Gladis, which tipped her shoulder and splattered on the steps.
Red wasn't at the fire any more. And a moment past the rage, I felt
that surge of good feeling to rival those acid moments of unbearable
friendship when the gates will not shut. Later, I went up behind Dollar and ca1ilght him across the back oflhe head, hard.
"What'd you do chat for ... ? he whined,lids crimped around eyes
gone under the fire.
670 Dhalgren
"For throwing that God-damn can."
His eyes crimped more and his mouth opened on that slate-chip
laughter (clear, a little shrill, like a boy's on the short side of puberty)
and he said: ·Oh, man, did you see ,the way she hollered? I bet she was
scared enough to drop it right hen:,' and wheeled away, laughing, whne
D-t shook his head, watching, and said, gravely, "Shit, man.»
Tom and Thruppence were arguing about geography which took US
from the yard to the kitchen, from the kitchen to the front steps, from
the front steps to the yard. Everybodywas staggering and bending and
belly-clutching with laughter.
Then this altercation with Denny: "Man, I don't like to go to bed
with you when you're drunk,· he explained, three times, sadly, only
I knew if Lanya was there, he would have come; he did anyway.
Woke up later to find him gone; woke again, even later, lying on my
side, with his sman hot butt pressed against my belly, the continent
of his back, muscular an,d vertebral, going away in the grey. No hangover when I got up, but my gut was a little loose so that I knew the
first coffee or even water 1 drank would make me shit like hell. I'd
gone to sleep in my paRts. Getling them back together, I stepped into
the hall.
Red came fwmthe bathroom, gave me a funny look, and went out
on the service porch whne I went on up the hall, trying to figure
what had changed abollt him. Glanced out at him when I the
door: there was a projector chaiR hanging around his neck; figured
he'd gotten it off the mannequin in the bathroom. I opened the bathIOom door: Check.
Shit now? I wondered.
Wandered back to the service porch instead.
" ... you meaR the one that's gonM have the baby?" Red was asking, which Dollar answered, as I stopped to watch them:
"Fireball, what's the mauer with you! Not the pregnant ORe; the
other onel n-
"Oh. The other one. Sure."
(So some time while I'd been asleep, Red had acquired his first chain
and a name.)
1 leaned against the door frame. "Fireba1l?"
Red turned.
A half cup Qf wine spiJIed back and forth across the bottom of the
gallon jug hooked on Dollar's forefinger. He lifted it to his mouth with
both hands, dropped it again, aRd looked at me with eyes bright, wet,
The Anathemata: a plague journal 671
and pink. "Me and Fireball are gonna go get us some pussy, if she's still
puttin' it out, you know? You comin'r
I said to RedlFireball: "Where're your friends, Tom and Mak?"
"They split .•
uWe scared 'em off, huh?"
"You know; they're pretty ... ' He gestured with his hand. It meant
fmicky/normal!unimaginative-the same hand-joggle one patient in a
mental hospital will use to another to describe a third who's parlicularly out of touch that morning: palm down, fingers wide and waggling.
"They're nice guys, though. They gave me a ride all the way down here.
They treated me nice. Then, when the truck broke down, they didn't
seem to ntind if we hung out together, you know?"
"Come on,· Dollar said. The jug clicked the door frame as he
stepped out.
We went with him up the hall.
I opened the door to the back room and went in first, Dollar and
Fireball right beltind me. It was very warm. California, squatting in
the half-dark, stood up beside us and chuckled: "God damn! Copperhead and Glass are having themselves a fuckin' contest," heard
himself and decided to change the emphasis: "A fucking contest,
man." He chuckled again, swaying so close the hair over his shoulder brushed my arm.
Before the lion, rampant on the sHl, scorpions slept or sat. Jack the
Ripper, wandering
around, stepped over
sleeping Gladis and
one of the nonmembers who occaSionally crashes here.
Lady of Spainblack vest, black
Gladis and Mike, sleeping: knee to knee, forehead to forehead, his hair, long and light, lies
over hers, tight and black, his arm over her
brown collar, her arm above her belly. She
snores. (Conceit: They curled, facing, like single
quote marks enclosing an ellipSiS pared to a unit
point.)
jeans, black boots, with black chains a-tangle over tightly folded
arms and an intent, ntidnight frown-leaned against the wall,
shoulder to shoulder with Revelation, who was naked, gold hair at
his head a matted snarl and, down-sloping from gold-matted groin,
what I guess was half a hard-on, deeper pink than the rest of his
perpetual blush. He'd tucked his hands between his buttocks and
the wall, his expression, though as intense as Lady of Spain's, empty
of content.
Risa grunted: Copperhead ... moaned? growled? on top of her,
672 Dhalgrm
his freckled ass bouncing between her darker knees. The sleeping bag
they'd started out On (Raven\;, opened over the charred mattress) had
bunched into a green python under her back. Her elbows came away
from his (Copperhead still wOre his vest), flapped, and fell, One hand
slapping the mattress, the other catching his arm.
Glass sat in the corner, knees up, forearms over them, head back on
the wall, taking long, loud breaths.
"Hey?" California put his hand on my shoulder and whispered:
"You gonna get a piece?"
"Let's see how shes doing when he gets olT." But my cock was about
half"hard, and I could feel my heart in it for a dozen beats, titll shiftedmyleg.
OShel; really wild," California said. ·She wants everything you can
figure out, man! Right now, most of the ladies e"cept-" he nodded toward Lady of
Spain, who was say- .
ingsomething to Revelation (who did-n't
seem to hear), then
went back to watching ......... "are out noW.
But they were all in
here working on her
a little while ago!
Black WidoW; baby?
Whew ... 1 What a
T-V spectacular that
"Heyl" Lady of
Spain said from her
place on the wall.
Life in the Behavioral Sink, Episode Sixteen
Thousand Six Hundred and Thirty·Seven:
Heavy Cathedral, who is getting heavier,
squatted last evening With his back to the
house, discussing the behavior of overcrowd ..
ed rats, with a half·dozen of us who stood
around, had just come by
cradling a poor, dead mouse that had to be
flushed down the toilet. "Sure: counters astute, diminutive, and dark Angel, who is drunk,
"the similarities between rats and people are
very large. But the differences, I suspect, are
on the order ofthe factor of the differences in
body weight between an under-nourished
mouse and an eight-month pregnant woman'"
(Is art and sex replacing sex and death as the
concerns of the serious mind? Ufe here woulcl
make me think so.)
"Don't lay any ofthat shit on us." Her chin jerked up. "That wasn't
nothing like what you guys are into."
·Yeah," Revelation said. He squinted, scratched his upper lip with
nails you could see were clean from here. "That was something dif.
ferent.· He put his hand behind him aga.n. "That wasn't like this."
"Hell," California said. "They was having sex with the broad-l'
He glanced at Lady of Spain gone back to watching. "Well, they
was playing with the broad in a ... sexual way. Anyway; it turned me
on." Suddenly he grinned, leaned closer: "Only this pig likes to get
The Anathemata: a plague journal 673
her pussy poked with a peeker. So-naturally-she called in the
shock troops. Well, man, there ain't nothing 1 like to eat out better
than pecker-poked pig-pussy!" Californias grin grew huge; he began
to shake my shoulder: "Shit, am 1 glad to see you, Kid: You get in there
and there'll be something between her legs that won't turn my stomach when 1 get down there eatin' it out, you know?"
1 raised an eyebrow.
The huge grin became silent laughter. "I mean some of these motherfuckers are animals, man!"
"Animals?" Jack the Ripper came up, intense and soft. "You're a
fuckin' hog! Every other time some nigger pulls his dick out of that
hole, this Jew bastard's down there on his hands and knees-" and
the Ripper stuck out his tongue and scrunched up his face, snorting
and grunting: which made California laugh out full voice. "Shit," the
Ripper said (on the traditional two beats), and went out the door.
"You want to do her both at the same time?" Dollar was saying,
head together with Fireball. "See, I'll get it in her pussy; man, and
you can work on her head. Course, if you want to do it the other way
around-"
"Oh, man-" California turned-"the bitch is tired! She's been
going all night!"
'She waS doin' them freaky things before," Dollar said. "Takin' on
two guys at onc<>--"
"Sure," California said. "But that was back-Aw; never mind!"
Copperhead finished, pushed back -to his knees, stood slowly; then
bent again to drag his green pants up around one leg; the other was
bare. "Your turn?" he asked across the room -to Revelation. Copperhead was breathing hard. "You better get your ass over here!"
"I already been, once." Revelation glanced at me. "Glass wants to
go again. And the Kid's here ... '
"You go on, n Glass said frorn the .floor. lilt's gOI1na take me
er five minutes to get my breath..'
"Then, fuck it ...• Revelation came forward, when I didn't move,
leaving Lady of Spain by the wall. "It ain't gonna take me no five minutes." Chuckling, he stepped over Devastation, who turned over and
dragged his forearm over his face. "Like 1 said, I'm an in-and-out man,
you know?"
"Well, yeah," Copperhead said. "That's what you wanted seconds
for, ain't it? Come on, white boy-" He stepped back, laughing. "You
can fuck her. She ain't prejudiced."
674 Dhalgren
Risa made a sort of hoarse and gravdly sound that Went on, while
her mouth opened and closed. Her hand slapped the mattress, her
head Came up. She looked around. (Her hair waS stiff and long, like a
spray of dark water that had shot from her head and frozen), still tnak.
ing that sound.
It gave me chills. My cock went from half to full hard. I had 10
move it over with my thumb.
"Man!" California said, watching me.
"Okay. sweetheart!" Revelation stepped Over D-t, who looked saUd
aut. "Okay, I'm camin', I'm comin'!" Some of the guys laughed.
" .•• shit!" Uidy of Spain peeled forward from the wall and walked
toward us, arms still folded, head shaking. Her frown had become a
tough, ironic smile in which was a lot of disgust. She passed: I put a
hand on her shoulder. "Hey. you ever go after it like that?"
(Copperhead: "Get your tongue in her mouth, man. It ain't no fun
if you don't tongue her .•. yeah, like that."
(Glass: ·She nearly chewed mine off." And laughed).
Uidy of Spain looked at my hand, looked at me, and, without
breaking expression, said: "Get off my ass, cocksucker.·
"Now hey . , • /" California frowned. "The Kid asked you a civil
question. You don't have to· go calling him no-"
Looking at me straight, Uidy of Spain said: "Now have 1 just called
you anything that ain't true, or asked you to do anythmg in a-what
is it? An.uncivll tone of voice?"
I nodded-"Right on-" and dropped her shoulder.
Lady of Spain shook her head, sucked her teeth.
"God damn,· California said. "These bitches are always gain'
around tryin' to cut a guy's balls off-'
.. Aw, fuck off," I said, "What does it take to cut yours off anywaya dull spoon? Look: first, I have sucked my quota of dick. And enjoyed
it. Second, my nuts are strung up there with two-inch steel cable. It
takes a lot more hatchet work than that to make them even feel loose, "
which California thought was pretty funny again and started laughing all over. "Your thing," I said, "just isn't some ,other peoples' and
there's nothing you can do about it.'
Lady of Spain shook her head again and pushed out between Dollar and Fireball.
I guess Revelation did come pretty fast. He was getting back up
on his knees already. face still blank, cock still half hard. Risa held!
his arm with both her hands. Revelation shook his head, sort of
The Anathemata: a plague journal 675
sheepishly: "Like I say; sweetheart, I guess I just don't ,take that
much-"
But Glass was already down on his hands and knees, pushing Revelation aside, pants open, buckle dangling, cock flapping at his belly
like a shy foot of over-sized garden hose.
Copperhead, holding his pants up with one hand, with the other
helped Revelation stand.
"You see,n Revelation said. "Even the second time, I go pretty ... "
"A load is a load,' Copperhead said. "How you wanna time it is
your problem.'
Revelation took an unsteady step that puHed him away from Copperhead's grip, said, "God damn ... !" ,then started to the wall,
Halfway. he glanced at me again, suddenly got a big, pink grin. "You
better get some of that whUe there's still some left." At the wall, he
turned to lean, hands once more tucked behind him, genitals stHI engorged, slick with cOmmon juice.
I stood, watching, wondering when I could maneuver to see
pussy:
With one hand, Risa held Glass's shoulder. Her knees splayed,
sagged, recovered. His hips were going side to side as much as up
and down. She was doing something with her other hand-trying
to get his pants further down his legs, I realized. Finally he paused
long enough to let her push them to his knees, and before she
twisted back up him he began to hump and flatten. She
lifted one foot, dropped it, and for a moment her face turned from
him to us, eyes and mouth wide, tongue crawling around her
teeth, till it snapped back, then lapped at Glass's neck.
Copperhead squatted by them-to watch? But he leaned forward,
said something. Glass slowed.
Risa said something I couldn't hear, put her hand on Copperhead's
naked knee, raised her head a moment, said something else.
"God damn," California said. "Them two been going at her four,
five times. Each."
Coppem.ead stood up and walked toward us. "Oh, man!" He put his
hand on the wall to balance while he tried three .urnes to get his other
foot back inside his pants. Perspiration shone among the freckles and
red hairs inside his
thigh. Then green'
canvas sUd over
them. He jerked his
Re-reading this, it occurs to.me that the written
words don't let you know whether Copperhead
meant Risa or Glass. His tone of voice did,
though.
676 Dhalgren
chin toward Glass and Risa. "That nigger can fuckl" His foot coming
down, knocked D-t's shoulder (Copperhead: "Hey-sorryl") who
looked up and said, "You ain't doin' so bad yourself," and dropped his
face back into his arm.
Coppetbead grinned, pushed his works, glistening like wet leather,
into his fly and buttoned the top button.
"You want something to drink?" Califomiaasked; he'd taken the
jug from Dollar.
"No." Copperhead Tubbed the place between his beard and his
thick, lower lip with the side of his forefinger. "But she does.'
"I think," I said, ·r am gonna get apiece.'
"Hey," Copperhead said, ·you better get some-before we hill her!'
He shook his head. His beard was wet. "Go on." Then he went out of
I stepped across D-t and nearly tripped on a blanket tangled between !Wo mattresses. California came over too; he stuck his forefinger in the lion's brass mouth, wiggled it there, then suddenly grinned
at me as though he'd made a joke. I just leaned against the wall to
watch.
Once Glass threw np his head, face bright with sweat, teeth and
eyes minStrel white. Risa's head and shoulders shook like somebody
was hammering the sales of her feet. She kept saying, ·Ughhlth . ..
Ughhhh . .. Ughhhh . .. " and sometimes closing her mouth. Glass's
face slapped down and hid her unfocused blinks.
I squatted by the wall. .
Glass's hips, smacking hers, made her thighs shake.
I got my hand under my belt to pull my dick over; it rubbed hard
on a seam or something, which hurt.
Glass threw back his head again, pushed himself up on his hands,
his asS going. Risa's hands bounced on his shoulders. She grabbed air,
she slapped th,e mattress; then she hung on his neck. The heel of one
foot dug the her toes wide, then curling down On their dark
knuckles.
She was making a sound faT all the world like a flannel tom near
the ear. Glass finished
I guess she didn't or couldn't or. woutdn' t.
Still np on his hands, his head dropped. She kept pulling at his
shoulders. He took a loud breath and sat back on his knees. ·Oh,
shit ... n
The Anathemata: a plague journal 677
Risa dropped her hands between her legs.
I got up and stood just behind Glass. When Risa's knees went
down, her foot slid by my boot. She rubbed her ankle back and forth
on mine through the soft leather. Glass stood, unsteadily, so I gave
him a hand. He held my arm with one hand, tried to pull his pants up
other, and said: "Go on, man. Fuck that pussy. Yeahl Shit ... '
He looked very dazed and not quite at me.
I opened my fly.
Risa looked pretty dazed too.
Her bfeasts rolled on her ribs as she rocked. I had to bend my knees
to get my crank out. She reached to scratch her hip; then her hand
forgot what it was doing, touching her stomach a\1 over; she was looking a\1 around the room, moving just her narrowed eyes. I put my bare
foot on her cunt. She rocked her hips till I pTessed hard; then she held
my dirty ankle aDd rubbed her hair on the callused ba\1. The arched
bone there slid a·round under its wet skin. What had leaked into tbe
hair under my instep felt thick as clay slip. She opened and closed and
opeRed her mouth, but breathing, loudly, through her nose. And her
eyes were sti\1 moving around without fixing anything. A drop of
water toNed sideways down her jaw.
I took my foot away.
She began to pull at herself, digging two fingets in, 10 open and
close a raw canyon; she blew out her mouth, all her lips Slicking and
pul1ling apart.
(Did I think: Who am I standing here with a hard-on for? Me, her,
OI them? No, I didn't.) I opened my belt and kneeled down. She got
an expression almost a smile and swung it a\1 around her, head rolling;
and stHI pulling. Christ.
I went forward. Holding myself up on one hand, I caught one of
hers and got it down on my dick. (Lanya once told me lots of guys get
up tight if a girl tries to touch their dick when they're putting it in; it
turns me on.)
I remember I opened my eyes once and saw her brown neck
stretching as her head turned away, then wrinkling as her ear hit mine,
hard. She was pushing at my paRts (0 get the belt buckle out of the
way, I realized. Then she grabbed hold. I fantasized about eating her,
some. And her blOwing Dollar, for some reason; I remember thinking
this was freaky enough that I shouldn't have to fantasize at all. At
Which point, Without loosening her legs on my hips or her alms over
678 Dhalgren
my shoulders, she screamed. Loud. It scared me to death. I thought
There goes my hard. It didn't-but that was the first time I thought
about tbe rest of tile people in the room. Somebody was standing neat
us; because 1 could see his sneaker right in front of my faoe. When she
began t<J drag air back inoo her chest, with some wet sound in her
mouth (which, hunting for mine, finaUy caught it-l tried to lick her
tonsils), I thought I was going to come. Only it took another minute
and a half. When I come, sometimes, balling somebody I'm not too
interested in (or having particularly uninteresting sex with somebody
I am), I get some picture (or words) that stays a rew seconds until it
hazes to something hard to reca·1I as a dream: This time, it was an
image of myself, holding hands with someone (lanya? Risa? Denny?)
and running among leafless Irees laced with moonlight while the person behind me kept repeating: " ... Grendal, Grendal, Grendal . ..•
which, while I rocked my face in her hal neck and the stinging in my
thighs, chest, and heUy went on, seemed very funny. (Specific and
primitive?) I raised my face out of the moon-bright branches into a
room lathered with the smell of smoke alld scorpions. And grinning,
man, like a tigerl
I sat back, dragging chains over her. She bit one, held it in her teeth
so it tugged on my neck. I pulled, till it came out of her mouth,
kneeled back, and bumped i"to someone-Dollar-who said: "Hey.
man. Preuy good, huh?"
"Watch it," California said, trying to crowd in. "Come on, huh?"
Copperhead, holding a gallon jug, stooped down beside Risa. Glass
stood just behind his shoulder. Copperhead got one hand under her
neck. She held onto the knee of his fatigues.
I stood up while California clambered over her ankles. "Hey. Copperhead? Man, she's drunk enough already! She's gonna be sick if
"Get out of here,· Copperhead said: "This is water. She asked me
for a fucking drink of water before, thats all."
"Oh." California slid his hands up Risa's legs. A tendon in her thigh
sRook. California hent.
"Aw, come olll" Glass said, and pliUched at California's head. "Can't
you wait until she has a Iuckin' drink of wated" But Risa grabbed California's hair, grunting, and pulled him down. Glass sucked in his
brealh and watched her drink till Copperhead lowered the jug. Water
ran down Risa's cheek. She got OUt, •.. . thank you ... "
The Anathemata: a plague journal 679
"You're welcome," California said, muffled in her crotch.
Which Copperhead must have thought was the funniest thing he
ever heard. He just broke up. And spilled water aU over the 1I00r.
"You can take her in the mouth," Dollar was saying to FirebaU. "If
you want, you can take her mouth anel I'H take her pussy. Or you can
take her pussy and I'll ...•
. I walked to the door. Halfway there I realized I was going to shit
within thirty seconds.
Siam walked in. "She still workin' out?"
"Party's still going," I said and pushed by him.
In the ha\:l, Spitt was rubbing the scar on his chest. "Them guys still
messing around in there? Jesus Christ." He looked unhappy.
I asked: 'You get your tum?"
"Yeah. Before. But they just go on and fucking onl They're gonna
kill her or something."
"You're just scared it'll all be used up by the time you're fit for
seconds.' I grinned. "Why don't you go in there and see if you can
finish her off?" Then I went in lhe bathroom, got my pants down
fast, and sat. .
My buttocks got wet fr<Jm the splash, and there was six seconds of
gut-cramp that started in my ankles. Then it eased. My crank hung
down against the porcelain, so cold I had to slide my hand over it to
hold.t away (Cold knuckles; better than a cold cock.) Through the
bathroom door I watched Spitt, still stancfutg in the hall. After a while,
he went in the room.
"Grendal grendalgrendalgrendalgrendalgren .. . n still ran lhrough
my head. Suddenly. I realized I hadn't been listening carefully
enough; I'd stuck the brake in the wrong place. The actual word I'd
heard at orgasm and that, for the last few winutes had been repeating in my head was: " ... Dhalgren .. . n I wij>ed myself with part of
the second page of the
Bellona Times, January
22,1776.
Going back to the
loft bed, I thought it
Power is all. Another falsification: I do not
tell how I gain or maintain it. I only record
the ginger stroll through the vaguQly fetid
garden of its rewards.
would be nice if Lanya had stopped hy and Was wailing with Denny
(knowing she wouldn't because I'd thought about it); she hadn't.
Up in the loft, I lay on my back for a minute; then t rolled over and
hit Denny on the shoulder.
680 Dhalgren
He woke up. "What?"
"Smell my dick," I said.
"Huh ... ?" Then he made a disgusted sound, sat up, bent down,
and sniffed. My fly was open.
Denny looked up, frowning. "You got dandruff in your crotch." He
wrinkled his nose. "Who is it?"
I laughed.
"The girl they got in the back. Risa." I grinned at him. 'You get
some?"
'Oh ... 1 went in there before whUe you were asleep. It was mOstly girls in there then. I didn't do nothing." He settled again on the bed,
his back to me.
Looking up at the ceiling, I began to fan asleep: the kind of falling
where you watch yourself do it, and everything gets all tingly and
My speech changes when I talk to different
people; J go from "ain1t" to "aren't," lIyes" to
"yeah," from a fixed to a formless diction. With
Lanya, a 'I'ot of the time, it gets playful, arch.
With others, it flattens. When I'm
u
pset, it punctures with dozens of noise nodes: "you know's, I'
"1 mean's," and "sort of's." I left behind me a
whole vocabulary and syntax at the colleges I
passed through, which began to come back
with Newboy, Kamp, that interview, and with
Calkins at the retreat. It's lability, ,not affectation;a true and common trait. But if I tried to
write down what I say as I move from speech
context to speech context, it would read like
lack of character, not a characteristic. I note all
the eccentric words around me: Glass used the
word· ... radically. , ,» this morning and seVeral times I've heard Lady of Spain ref",r to an
" . . . entity .. ,/I while among the others J've
heard II, • , sententious. , ," ", , . caravan, .. "
and", . _conspicuous ... " go by. But when I
transcribe the conversation arouncl me, I find
myself purposely playing down the verbal range
of it so that it does not read like post-literate affectation-which :it isn't. George's speech can't
even be written down for the common reader;
Throckmorton <at the party) speaks only in inane
combinations of serial phrases that become
satires on themselves as soon as they are .
yo" sink among the
tingles.
And woke up
with Denny on top of
mel my arms across
his back. He was
breathing in short
gaspS, face against
my neck, rubbing off
on my belly. Wondered why rd bothered to wake him up
before with that routine which was pretty much calculated
to turn him on. 1
didn't stop him, but
1 was annoyed; so
when 1 began badmouthing him (growling into his hair:
"' . . . come on, you
two-bit cocksucker;
come on, you scrawny. shit-ass basThe Anathemata: a plague journal 681 recorded but that, during make mir- acles of communication. I suppose I'm just get- ting frustrated by what written words can't do. This afternoon, Gladis, wholely pregnant and half smiling, said through the kitchen screening: "Vou got no •.. " paused and interjected three syllables of laughter " ... know what I can see it in here, can 11" What marks of ellision, inflec- tion, and melody could makethat s"und, orthe sense of it, intelligible on paper? Spent that afternoon trying to figure that one out. I strip and bleach sO the faint patternings of a real voice will show through; and end with something artificial as a henna job. And Calkins, determined not to readJ waits for my next book in this jargon called the written word I've been stuck withl tard ... ") it was real: he shot pretty quick. But by then 1 had a hard-on again. 1 was actually sort of dig- ging him just lying there on top of it. But he got down to suck me off. I guess I'd wanted him to do that when 1 first woke him up; now I didn't. "Don't waste YOUT time! n I told him, dropping my chin to watch the top of his head. "Can't you just go to sleep?" But he kept working (and playing with my asshole which I'd mentioned Nightmare mentioning to me) and 1 shot. He crawled back up beside me, and I held him around his belly with his back to me (like a warm dog) while he occasionally squiTmed like he'd be more comfortable on the other side of the bed (yeah, like trying to sleep with a dog) while I wondered: If I'm starting to have to fantaSize girls in order to come with guys, maybe I'm not as bisexual as 1 keep teiliug myself? I know: I'm a closet monosexual. Oh yeah. While he was blowing me, 1 stopped him in the middle and asked him what he was thinking about-to be a bastard. Very honest and very surpnsed, he told me Dollar (1 flashed on the mo- ment with Risa when our pet murderer went through my mind) which got me a little mad. But that's what I get. I note here (because sex does have something to do with love) Denny's said he loves me six times now, admitted it al- most under his breath with this hung ex- pression as though he was daring him- self to say it-it al- ways comes off the Walking with Lanya today, I told her that. She beamed: 'Yes, he's said it to me a times too. It's charming." "I don't know," I said. "I don't think so. I mean,. I don't understand it. He loves you. He loves me. What the hell does that mean?" She ,looked surprised, even hurt. Finally she
682 Dhalgren
wall when welre
busy doing some·
thing else: moving
the couch across ,10
the other side ofthe
front room, ch1'ck·
ing junk into the
yard across the
fence, or when 1 was
trying to help Cath·
edral bend the mo·
torcycle's kickstand
back into shape. 1
don't really know
what 1 feel about
him, but I'm glad as
hen on. of them
stays here. (I guess I
wish it was Lanya;
she's more interesting, in or out of bed
..• which isn't real·
ly the point; really, I
just wish she were
here.) When I woke
up, he had wriggled
out of my arms and
was curled up in the
corner against the
walls.
When I got up
and went into the
living rOOID:! most
of them were stHI
asleep. Fireball sat
on the edge of the
couch eating SOme·
thing out of a cup
with a spoon. He
said: "Well--when somebody uses strange
words to you that you just do not understand,
you have to lislen for the feeling and get atthe
meaning that wayl"
"1 think," 'I' said after a moment, "it may
mean, when he says it, he's going to leave me
before you do-who say it sO much less fre·
quently."
"You think he'll leave us?" Me/us-it struck
like that. "Give him a reason-to stay. I've tried."
"That's a hard one even hi much simplet situations. I wonder if it just has to do with the
kinds of people we're familiar with. To you, I'm
replaceabre. Ifm a. nice ape, who even happens
to be more interesting inside than out. I think
one of the most interesting things to you is the
way the machinery jerks around by stops and
starts. Like you say, though, you've known ge·
.niuses before. It's nothing new. n
"Weill"
"Denny, I think, is the first Denny you've ever
For you, he's unique--whereas, for met
everything from the foster homes he's lived in
to the rhythm he bucks his ass at, the protec.
tive brutality, and even that well of playful
sweetness you can never touch bottom in, the
hard.h'1adedness good and bad: sweet and
fucked.up as he ,is, there'le many, many, many
of him floating around." We turned the corner.
"Now for me, you're the irreplaceable one: I've
never seen you up so close before, and I do not
understand you at all. You say sometimes I act
like I don't see you? I don't even know whereto
lookl Uving with you around is like living with a
permanent dazzle. The fact that you even like
me, or look at me, or brush by me, or hug me,
or hold me, is so surprising that after it's over l
have to go back through it a dozen times in my
head to savor it and try and figure out what it
was like because I was too busy being astounded while it was happening. "
"Really? That's marvelous!" She was silent'
the next quarter of a block. Then she said: "He's
not going to leave. At least not for a while.
Though you may be right about who leaves
first, whenever that happens ... if ever."
stood up when I
came in (Filament
with, oddly, Devasta·
tion were tucked together on the couch
behind him; the pale
Black Widow, with
the dark Lady of
Spain curled against
The Anathemata: a plague journal 683
"What do you see?"
"That you are a whole lot of real person. And
so, for that matter, am I. Someone who's had as
little of that as Denny has just isn't going to run
out before he's had a lot more.'
"Sounds good," I said. "Hope it works. I like
you two. I want you with me. Just don't let me
start taking either one of you for granted!"
"Not,
dear heart, if I can help it.'
her, slept on the floor among Tarzan-and.most·of·the·apes) as though
he wanted to speak to me. I nodded.
He nodded back. He didn't seem to be able to start, though, so he
ate another spoonful
'Come here," I told him.
Still shoeless, he stepped over a confusion of feet-the Widow's dull
black Wellington's, Cathedral's floppy brown suedes. I put my hand
on his shoulder. "You like Dollar, don't you?"
Fireball said: "He's a pretty funny little guy. But he's really okay,
huh?" The scrawny, rusty·haired coon had a sleepy half·smile. His
eyes looked like ci,rcles cut from our sky, tossed into the evenly milky
coffee of his face.
"Good," I told him. 'You look out for him. You 11Il\ke sure he doesn't
get into any trouble around here, you head"
The smile wavered-
·Somebody's got to. And I'm tired of it. So you do it now. You hear
me1 H •
-andfel!.
He nodded.
"Good." With both hands I took off one of my chains, put it over
his head, and hung my fists on his chest. I pulled one down, while
the other raised, my knuckles sliding on his skin. Then I ran it the
other way. "This'll go with the one you already took for yourself,
right?"
Fireball blinked at me.
"Ifs yours.' I let go.
"That mean I'm a member ... ?"
On the floor, Ravell propped his head on his elbow. "That's the way
we play, sweetheart.' He laughed, rolled over (into Cathedral who just
grunted), and closed his eyes.
684 Dhalgren
Fireball looked back at me. The sleepy smile returned. ·Okay,· he
said. "Hey, thanks, Kid. Okay ... "
"You look out for that crazy, pimple-faced white bastard."
"Okay,' he «peated. "I will." then he ale another spoouful out of
his cup.
I went onto the porch.
Risa was sitting outside On a crate under a tree, reading (Brass Orchids? I craned to see. Yeah.) Rubbing two fmgers in the dusty corner
of the screenless frame, I watched her, wondering if I should go down
and ask her about what I was thinking, and finally decided: Fuck it, if
you're gonna do it, do it.
I went down the steps-the door clacked behind me-and crossed
the yard. "Hey ... " I squatted beside her, elbows and hands (won.
dering how can they get that dirty injust a day) a double bridge, knee
to knee. "1 wanted to know, I mean, about last night.".
She looked up.
"You enjoyed that, huh? 1 mean, you were into it. Because some of
the-one oflhe women seemed a little upset by it. So I wanted to ...
knOw. b •
She'd slapped her hand over the page like she dic\n't want me to see
it. Which was odd. Her heavy legs shifted. She looked uncomfortable.
I waited, thinking: Well, she's probably just not a very verbal person,
or maybe she just can't get answers to questions like that together, just
like that; or maybe, it's a stupid question, or just an embarrassing One.
I mean she could have always said: Look, asshole, why do you think
I was doing it ifI didn't like it? Also, I felt silly pretending, even to
myself, I was speaking for tidy of Spain when, of course, I was speaking forme.
"I mean," I said, "I was curious: if you felt anyone had ... well,
forced you?"
The top tWo buttons of' her blue shirt Were open. Her brown skin
was creased between her neck and shoulder. Ust night, her eyes, half
closed, had seemed so large. Now, wide, they looked small. What she
said (a lot more together than I'd expected) was: "That was mine," and
opened and closed her mouth to say something else, but ended up repeating: "That was all mine. You just can't have any part ohhat.
all. It was ... mine!" •
"I mean-" 1 was surprised-but I juSt shrugged: "I just wanted to
know if you ... enjoyed m"
The Anathemata: a plague journal 685
She said: 'You go find out yourself, if you want it!· Then, like she
was jerking from an anticipated blow, her eyes slipped back to the
page. Her fist slipped back to her lap.
I stood up, my mind jutting alI on: Do I want to get gang-banged myself? Well, all right, ,consider. Considering, I walked across ,the yard.
One: I don't like to take it up the ass because when I've tried, it's almost
always hurt like hell. Maybe half a dozen times, it turned out not to be
painful. just indifferent (one of these was two days ago with Denny and
tinya, and the emotional thinglhere, anyway, was nice.) But, Two: I've
had my own dick up the asses of enough guys who were obviously feeling no pain, and a lot of pleasure. And I've been in line and taken my
turn in a guy's ass like with Risa's cunt last night. So (Three:) if Risa's
right, maybe there's something wrong with me that every-well almost
every-time a cat has tried to shove his dick into me, it fucking
stings ... ? Anyway, if nothing else, she had said something that had
made me think, which is one way I decided if people are intelligent.
As I went up the steps, Copperhead's head came out of the door;
passed by me, went over, squatted by her (like he'd seen me do? Presumably not) and put his freckled hand on the knee of her jeans. They
bent close, couferring. She said something that made him laugh. (She
didn't look too happy though.) I stepped through the screen door onto
the porch, glanced out the window again.
As Copperhead stood, tidy of Spain (with Filament just behind
her), passed now on the other side of the fence, stopped with three
fingers hooked over the chipped boards, and asked-I could hear her
chains click the wood but not really what she said-Risa something
like, How was she feeling?
Risa twisted a little, frowned, and said: "My back is sore."
Spit! was on the porch, standing by the sink, his arms folded. 'She's
something, huh?" He looked resentful as hell.
I glanced out at Risa, looked back at Spitt. He was shaking his head.
"How many times she get fucked? SiXty? Seventy-five times?"
"Aw, man,' I told him. "You crazy? Would you believe sixteen, seventeen? Maybe twenty?"
"Huhr
"There were only seven, eight of us doing anything. And half of us
only went once. D
Spitt thought a rew seconds. "But, Jesus Ghrist ... 'Look at her! She's
just sitting there, reading your damn book like that!"
686 Dhalgren
'Spitt," I said, "balling a couple of dozen people in one night is
merely a prerequisite for understanding anything worth knowing." I
mean I have done that. "That's just the way it is."
Spitt didn't seem to think that was funny, so I went back inra the
kitchen and left him looking. Somehody (Spitt?) had washed a lot of
the dishes.
This is the last full balnk [blank? J page left.
Re-reading, I note the entries only ghost chronological order. Nat
only have I filled up an the free pages, but all the half and quarter
pages left around the poems or at the ends of ather entries. A few
places where my handwriting is fairly large, I can write between lines.
I'll have to do a lot more writing in the margins. Maybe I'll try writ,
ing cross,ways OYer pages filled up already.
Sometimes I canBot tell who wrote what. That is upsetting. With
some sections, I can remember the place and time I wr<>te them, but
have nO memory of the incid.nlS described. Similarly, other sections
refer to things I recaU happening to me, but kneJo/w just as well I
never wr<>te out. Then there are pages that, today, I interpret one way
with !he clear recollection of having interpreted them another at the
last fe-reading. .
Most annoying is when I recaU an entry, go hunting through, and
B.I a...HI find it or half ofit not there, I've read some pages so many
times Iheyve puHed loose from the wire spiral. Some of these I've
caught before they ripped completely free, folded ....... f ,them up
and put them inside Ihe front cover. Carrying the book around,
though, I must have let them slip aut. The first pages-poems and
journal notes-are all gone, as well as pages here and there through
the rest.
More will go, too.
I work the paper strips, edged with torn perforations, out of the
[sJpiral with my pencil point. And write more. Looking at the last
page,l can't tell if it's the same one that was there a month ago or not.
was nearly too bizarre for comment:
Stopped into It was so early I wondered why it was open.
Maybe five people there, among them-Jack. He sat on the last stool,
The Anath.mata: a plague journal 687
hands (skin grey, cuticles wedged with black, crowns scimitared with
it, half moons shadowed undererack.d skin) flat on the counter. His
bair featbered the rim of his ear (in tb. twisted cartilage: white flakes.
On the trumpets floor: dry amber) and went without change into sideburns that join around his cbin in scrubby beard. His neck was greywitb one clean smear (where he'd been rubbing himself?). His lids
were thickened, coral rimmed, and lasbless. The short sleeve of his
shirt: torn on the seam over white flesh. Above backs of his sboes,
his socks, both beels torn, curled from ridged, black callous. Tbe fly
flap on his slacks was broken. Tbe brass teeth roller.coastered over his
lap and under his belt-the buckle tongue had snapped: he'd tied tbe
belt-ends together. "You wanna buy me a beer?" he asked. "First nigbt
I got to town, I bought you and your girlfriend a beer."
"Just ask for wbat you want," I said.
Tbe bartender glanced over, pusbed a rolled sleeve higber; from
under his thick fingers the tattooed leopard stalked tbe jungle of bis
arm.
"I'd buy it myself," Jack said. "But, you know; I've been pretty down
and out. You buy me a beer, man, and I'll do the same for you, soon
as ! get myself back on my reet"
I said to tbe bartender: "How come you won't senle him?"
Tbe bartender put his knuckles on the Counter and swayed. "All he
gOlta do is ask for what be wants.' He looked around at the other customers.
"Give us a couple of beers," I said.
"Right up.' The open bottles clacked the boards in front of Us.
"There you go." I took a swallow from mine.
Jack's bottle sat between bis thumbs. He looked at it, then moved
his fingers a little to the left.
What he'd done was adjust tbe spaces so that the bOltle was centered between his hands.
The bartender glanced again, pursed his lips-about as close as he
would let himself get to shaking his head-and moved away, fist over
fist.
"You don't have to pay here," I said
"If! could pay," Jack said, "I really would; I mean, if! had it, I'd buy
it myself. I'm not a skinflint, man. I'm really generous when I got it."
I considered a moment. Then} said: "Just a second. n } reached in
my pants pocket.
688 Dhalgren
The doll"" bill, in a moist knot, came up between my third and
fourth Dnger. It was so crumpled, at first I thought I'd just found some
dirty paper .l'd stuck there (a discarded poem?). I spread it on the
counter. One corner, from sweat and rubbing, was worn away down
to the frame of the "1.'
While Jack looke.d at it, I wondered what Lanya would do with
hers; or Denny with his.
Jack raised his head, slowly. The corner of his mouth was cracked
and sore. "You can have a pretty rough ,time in this city; you know?"
HiS hands were still flat. Foam bubbled up his bottle·neck and over,
puddling at the base. "lJ'lstdon't understand it, man.l don't. I mean,
I've done everything I could think of, you know? But it just don't look
like I can make it here no how. Since 1 been here-· He turned to me.
Bubbles banked and broke against his fingers. "I been nice to people!
They got all dilferent kinds of people here, too. I mean I ain't never
seen all kinds of d;.l[erent people like this here before. I've been nice
and tried to listen, and learn how to do, you know? Learn my way
around. 'Cause it isdiffereRt here ... Ilut I just don't know." HiS eyes
went above alld behind me.
I looked back.
Jack was looking at Bunny's empty cage. The black velvet curtain
at the back swung as though someone had just brushed by on the
other side. "Like that big nigger that they got his pictllre lip, all. over
the place his God damn dick hangin' out all over. I just don't see
that. I mean I don't got Rothin' against it. But, man, if they gonna do
shit like: ,that, why don't they put some pictures of some pussy up too!
You know? If they gonna do one, don't you think it's right they should
do the other?"
"Sure," I said.
"I mean, maybe somebody like me, or you-you got a girl friendis interested in something else, huh? When I first got here, I knew
things weren't gonna be like every where else. I was mal nice to people; and people was nice to me too. Tak? The guy I met with you,
here? Now he's a pretty all right person. And when I was staying with
him, I tried to be nice. He wants to suck on my dick. I'd say: 'Go
ahead, man, suck on my fuckin dick.' And, man, lain' t never done
nothin'Uke that before ... I mean not serious, Uke he was, you know?
Now; I dondt. I ain't sorry I done it I don't got nOlhin' against it. But
it is just not what lUke aU that much, you understand? I want a girl,
with tits and a pussy. Is that so strange? You understand that?"
The Anathemata: a plague journal 689
"Sure, I) I said. !.II understand."
Jack pushed the corner ofhis mouth out with his tongue, trying to
break the scab. "I guess he UBderstood too. Tak, I mean. Hes still nice
to me. He talks to me when he sees me, you know? He asks me how
I'm doin" stuff like that ... Man, I just wish I'd see some pictures of
some nice pussy up there, beside all Ihat dick. I mean what I'm
interested in; it would just make me feel better. "
1 drank some beer. "Make me feel better too."
"You been to that commune place-you know; in the park?" Jack
looked at Ihe wrinkled bill. "Tak took me down there. And I guess it
was pretty nice, you know: I was talking to this one girl, who's one of
the Ones who runs it-"
"Milly?"
"Yeah. Mildred. And she's goin'on and on about my deserting from
the army, and all about how good they all feel about deserters, and I
guess she's tryin' to be nice too-but after a while, I mean after a couple of fuckin' hours of that, I had to say, Lady, how you sittin' there
tellin' me how bad the fuckin' army is when you ain't never been in
the fuckin' army and I just been there for a God damn year and a Italf!
She don't know no chin' about why I run out of the fuckin' army. And
she don't even care." His eyes wandered 10 his hands, the bottle, the
puddled counter, the bilI, his hands ... "I mean, she didn't know a
thing .• ," He drew breath and looked up at me. "r met Frank at the
commune ... the guy who's supposed to be a poet? He'd been in the
army; and he deserted. H. knew what 1 was trying to tell her. For a
while there, him and me, we were pretty close. I can't talk as good as
he can, and he knows a11 about a lot ·of stuff I don't. But we went
around a lot together. He look me to that House where all the girls
live. You been there?"
IlNo. tl
"Well, it's really something, man. Some of them girls He pretty
nice-some are pretty strange, too. And the guys that come around
there ... well, some of those girls go for some pretty freaky guys. 1
guess some of them, the girls, even liked me. But only the freaky ones
that Ijust wasn't interested in. I wanted to get me one, sort of littlethey got some big women over there!-and pretty. And soft. And
smart. Now to me being smart in a girl is very important. If I could
get me a girl who could talk about things and understand things half
as good as Frank could, I'd be happy. And they got some smart girls
over there too. In fact,l don't think none of 'em is stupid. Just a lot of
690 Dhalgren
them is pretty freaky, though. There was some there just like I wanted. And I could of used a girl friend! I mean I talked to them. And
they ta}ked to me. !lut I couldn't get anywhere. Frank could. He could
get laid from Wednesday to next Thursday and start allover tomorrow. I wanted to get laid, but I wanted more than Ihat, too. Now I
know people around here is different from me; but that means I'm different from them, too. Only I guess if you're too different, nobody
wants anything to do with you. I mean they don't care shit." His hands
jerked in the puddle, to the bottle's base. He frowned for a while, and
I thought he was finished. !lut he said: "You hear about the niggerthis black guy who used to come in here: the one who got shot offtop
of the Second City Bank building?"
I nodded.
"Do you know what they think-" Jack turned on his stool, one
hand going to spread across the chest of his shirt-"John, Mildred, all
them people over in Ihe commune in the park-that I was the one
who done it! And they tellin' all sorts of other people, too! They tellin'
that to all them girls who live in that House together! 'Cause I'm
while, and I'm from the south, and I don't know how to argue good
and explain that they are fuckin' crazy-they are fuckin' if they
think I done something like that! n He looked as surprised in the
telling as I was in the hearing. "I ... I had a gun, you know?" His hand
closed to a loose fist that slid, stopping and starting, down his shirt,
leaving a wet stain.
I nodded.
"I always had a gun at home. They should have guns out there In
the park with all the nuts wandering around in this city. And all they
got to do is walk into a store and take one-like I did. They got people comin' around to the park all the God-damn time, to take food
away from 'em? And some of the people who come got guns. Get up
on a damn building and shoot a damn nigger?" His hand, loose in his
lap, twitched. "Jesus Christ, I wouldn't do notbin' like that! !lut I go
around the park, man, and 1 hear them talking. I mean I heard people
talkin'; then,they'd turn around, and they seen.me and shut up.! Frank
won't have nothin' to do with me no more. 1 mean he'd say hello or
somethin' when I'd speak first and then walk away to do something
else. !lut five times-five times I'd start over to find out just what'n
hell was gain' on and he walks away soon as he sees me comin'. I mean
it's like they're afraid of me; only they got me so scared, I'm afraid to
go back. Shit, 1 don't even believe Frank thinks I done it. Frank's a
The Anathemata: a plaguejoumal 691
nice guy. He just don't want the others to think he's havin' anything
to do with me. And I don't know what to do with that. I just don't
know. I thought for a while, right after I flISt met him, Frank was like
Tak. I know he goes after girls. But he writes that poetry and stuff and,
sort of, well ... if he liked me, I guessed maybe that was part of it.
'Cause I da·mn well couldn't see no other reason: hes smarter'n me,
older'll me, and hes got about everything he wants. When all this sruff
started, 1 thought maybe because I'd never done anything with him,
like with Tak, that was ... well, was why he was bein' so damn mean.
That pretty stupid, huh? But this place puts ideas like that into your
head. 1 told him, right out; I said, 'Anything you wanna do-Anything
at all ... !' I wished he'd been gay, man. I wished he'd liked me like
that. Because then, after bein' with Tak and all, even though I ain't,
I'd kind of known what ,to do. You know?" He looked at me, shook
his head, looked at the botde. "You know what I mean?" He took his
hand out of his lap and put it back in the puddle.
"Go on, n 1 said. IIYou've got it too simple. But go on. n
His jaw moved a few times, but he didn't speak.
"How come you don't come down to see us?" I asked. "You get.hungry, come on down to the nest. Tak'll bring you there if you ask him.
Left over flower-power, in all this pollution, was never my thing either." I was wondering about him and the department store people
but 1 didn't say anything.
"Well, you guys ... " jack turned a litde from side to side. (Thinking: His palms are now glued to the wood, but he doesn't want to be
noticed trying to tug loose.) "You guys ... I just don't knOw. All
you gOt down there is niggers anyway, don't you? After what I donewhat they said I done, what's a bunch of bad niggers gonna do when
I come walkin' in? You guys playa little too rQugh ... robbin' people
in the street. And killin' people." He blinked inflamed lids. "I don't
mean you, personal. You're a nice guy. And you're their chief, huh ... ?
!lut that's what I heard, you know? And 1 don't wanna get into shit
like that. I don't got nothin' against it, but ... " He frowned, shaking
his head. ·People talk. And people talk People talk, tryin' to make
you into something you ain't. And after a whi,je, you almost don't
know what you done and what you didn't do your own self. People
I don't remember ever getting corrected in high
school or college for writing who instead of
whom. But except to be funny, I've never said
whom in my life. Which makes me think there
talkin' about me,
about what 1 done,
that day when the
sky was lit across
692 Dhalgren
are two other words: who and who'-the apos·
trophe standing for the syncopated m. I've
been using whoI in this notebook for maybe a
week, but it still looks funny. So I'll cut it out.
with that funny kind
oflight, and that nigger they got in the
pictures was after
that white girl and
,the colored people had a riot and tore the hands off the church clock
down inJackson; they say cause 1 climbed up on the roof and shot the
nigger, from the roof, I'm responsible for the riot, for the whole thing,
for everything that happened here. Just for shootin' a damn nigger ... '
His lips, lined with brown, touched, parted, touched: "I had a gun. 1
didn't shoot ... ' He spoke slowly. "1 didn't shoot that black man. I
mean, I met him three or fourtime. Right in this bar. With Tak. He
was a nice man. 1 shot him ... ? 1 didn't shoot ... " Suddenly he
knuckled at his lips' scabbed corner. "I went down there. I did that.
Th check the placl! Ollt. And with my gun! You climb up the steps behind the Second City Bank building and get up the rest of the way by
the fireladder. You can hunker down behind the cornice and aim out
over the Whole damn street. Man, if you could shoot at all, you could
pick off anyone! An' 1 shoot pretty good ...• He looked at me, narrowing his thickened lids. 'You think 1 done it?"
"That depends," 1 said. "Did you check it out before or after he got
shot?"
Something happened onJack's unshaven face: the skin hetween his
,eyebrows wrinkled, the skin below his jaw slackened. Something happened behind it too. "Oh God," he said as flatly as, once, 1 heard a
man say "elevator." "Oh God ... ' He turned back to the bar. "They
all want it to be so bad, they gonna make it be no matter what 1 done
or "ot. They gonna make it be. Just by wantin' it."
"I know," 1 told him.
"What can 1 do? 1 don't know what to do."
'YOli have to know who you are," 1 said. "No matter what they say."
He didn't look at me. 'You know who you are?"
After a second 1 said: "About two thirds ofit; so 1 guess at ieast
I'm on my way. Maybe I'm pretty lucky." I finished my beer. "You
come down to the nest. Whenever you want. Just don't bring your
gun.tI
"I wish," Jack said after a few seconds, "I could just get me some
kind of job. A j ob where I could make some good money. Then 1 could
get me a girl friend; then I could buy my own drinks. I don't like to
sit in a bar and hustle nice guys for drinks."
The Anathem.ata: a plague journal 693
"When I first got to town," 1 told hiln, "I had a job, moving furniture. Five bucks an hour. You'd've dug it. It was made for you."
But he was looking at the dollar bill.
Since the frustration was making me mean, I decided it was time
to go. 1 stepped from the bar.
"Hey, Kid?"
"What?"
"Ain't you gonna take your change?" He put his middle finger on
the wrinkled dollar and slid it over the wet wood.
1 thought a second. "Why don't you keep it?"
"Aw, no, man-Naw, 1 don't like to take no hand-outs. I need a job;
make some good money; pay my own way."
"You take this hand-out," 1 said. "You need it."
"Well, thanks, man . . . ? .. His finger, holding the paper to the
counter, slid it back. "Thanks a lot! I'm good for it, too. You'll get it
back, once I get some money. You're a pretty nice guy."
Comments anyway: 1 want to help. And feel help would be impossible. Almost. Which is simply almost forgetting how much help I've
had.
1 hope he comes to the nest.
Off his head about everything else, he's right on about the pussy.
Despite George, and a city consecrated by twin moons, 1 know there
mllst be some greater, female deity (for whom George is only consort),
a sin yet to name her (as that sun is never named); we have all
glimpsed her, sulking in the forest of her knowledge-every tree a tree
of that knowledge-and there is nothing but to praise
This afternoon Lady of Spain and Filament staggered through the front
door in volcanic lallghter, lurched up the hall supporting each other-
"Hey,' I said. "What happened with you?"
Filament faced me, pursed her lips, inflated her cheeks, widened
her eyes, and rattled her chains before her breasts, miming something
1 did not understand. Her cheeks exploded with more laughter. Lady
of Spain, dragging Filament's arm, hauled her away.
Dollar pushed around me, grinning. "Hey!" he called. "What happened? Did you do it?"
Filament turned and repeated the mime.
Dollar-I'm not sure it meant more to him than it did ,to mecrashed back against the wall, holding his Stomach a"d howling: "Oh,
69'1 Dhalgren
wow •.. '! You mean ... ? Really ... ? Wow ... !" and followed them
up the hall, his laugh shriller than either of theirs.'
Then Tarzan stepped in from the serl'ice porch and said: "Look,
ladies, people are sleeping in the back room, huh?" There are twell'e
tones of voice in which you can say that: three ·of them would have
gotten him an apology with muffled giggles. He chose, at random,
from ,the other nine.
"Fuck off, man!" Dollar said, straightening. "It's their nest too!" His
had actually been
the only laugh with
edge to wake.
"Now look!" Tarzan said. "These
bitches come rUnning in here yelling
and shouting! Som(-
body's got to tell 'eIn
to keep-"
aNow you. lookl n
Filament said. She
had about as much
use for Tarzan as he
had for the other
caucasians in the
nest. ·You may be
Tarzan. But 1 am not
Jane!D
"I'd Cuck him, n
Lady of Spain said.
Black, and an occasional partaker in
intense cOnversations withJack
the Ripper, for Tarzan she had acqUired something
of the apes' aura.
(Because of this was
she more tolerant
of him?) "I really
Sex between nest members is rare -enough-I
can think of six, no seven exceptions, including me and Denny-to make me wonder if basically I don't have 'here an exandrous andlor
exogynous totem -group. Most sex comes
walking invited or not-and eventually
walks out. TRe seventh exception was Filasurprising. (to me, anyway. Lanya says,
"Why were you surprised?" I don't know why
I was surprised. I was surprised. that's all) af·
fait with a tali', 'Italian looking girl named Anne
Harrimon, who, her first night here, took lights
and chains and the name Black Widow. Always
standing hand in hand, always sitting knee to
knee whispering, running through the house
giggling or asleep at any time in any room,
one's head against the other's breast, one's
breast beneath the otherls hand, intense, inInocently exhibitionistic, and almost wordless,
they developed. within hours, a protective!
voyeuristic (?) male circle that ran with them
everywhere and that, incidentally, dissolved
the apes for the duration (the two were not
Tarzan's favorite people). After a couple of
weeks, the Widow came to me and returned
her chains. Those few minutes of conversation
in tRe yard WfJ,e the only time I really got to
know her. decided I liked her; decided I would
offer them back to her if I ever saw her again
(recalling Nightmare and Lanya): she left. FiliIment was sad but did not talk about her; then
returned to older ways. Seems to be the place
to mention it: I once asked Denny why he had
no nickname.
"Nightmare used to call me B.J.: he explained. "Untn I told him to cut it the fuck out.
So 11'm- just Denny,lI
would. But Tarzan
don't fuck nothin'."
Only one of the
twelve could make
that come out right.
She chose it with
such ease, I hope he
took a lesson.
"Aw; heft now; I
The Anathemata: a plague journal 695
"B.J.? What did that stand for?"
"1'11 give you one guess. n.
"Oh," I said. "Hey, what is your last name, by
the way?"
"'For a while it was Martin. Once it was
Cupp. Depended on the foster family I was
staying with."
Does the onomal malleability here make my
own loss more bearable?
was just asking you to keep it a little-"
D-t, naked and half asleep, loomed in the back doorway, forearms
high on the jambs, bony hips cocked askew, big hands (with their
funny thumbs) and head hanging. The head came up and he blinked.
"Tarzan, when I went to sleep, you was complaining about something.
Here it is with the sky all light, and you still at it?"
"I was just telling them to be quiet so they wouldn' t wake you up!"
"Time for me to get up anyway, boy. And they did not wake me."
"You seeP' Dollar said. "You see, all your yellin) and carryinJ on
makes more noise than_D.
Filament put her hand on Dollar's chest and lowered her head.
"Now you just wait too." She looked up again. "Tarzan, you like living here, right?"
"What you mean?" Tarzan's chin jerked belligerently.
"She asked you," Lady of Spain said. "if you like living here. Or not."
"Yeah," Tarzan said. "Yeah. I like living here. What are you gorina
do about it?"
"I'm not gonoa do anything," Filament said. "But you better. You
better do the same thing Dollar is doing."
"Huh?" Dollar said. "What am I-?"
"And that is: Since you like livin' here, you better make a real effort to stay."
D-t broke the silence with laughter. He shook in the doorway like
a windy scarecrow.
"Man,:II Tarzan said, "now what are'you at?"
D-t threw one arm around Tarzans neck-
.. . Hey, man! ... '1)
-and, still laughing, dragged him down the hall, ,occasionally rubbing his knuckles on Tarzan's head, hard.
" ... Hey, cut it out ... hey, stop it; that hurts ... damn it, nigged
Cut it out, •. hey, what are you ... stop _ . , !"
696 Dhalgren
In the living room, D-t let Tarzan up.
" ... what the fuck you dain'?" Tarzan rubbed both bands in his
yellow hair.
"I'm just trying to see if your head is as hard as you keep makin'
out like it is, motherfucker! We got any coffee?"
Tarzan dropped one hand, rubbed harder with the other. "Yeah,
1 ... I think so. Somebody made u.p a pail about an hour ago." He was
still confused.
In the hall, Filament and Lady of Spain walked on. Behind them
Dollar said: "He don't got no right to talk to you like that."
"He's got a right to talk. any way he wants," Filament said. "He's just
got to be set to listen afterward, that's all."
"That's what I mean," DoHar said; and so rarely do I agree with him
about anything, I write this exception down so
idea around with me like a cyst on the tailbone for (how long is that?)
and today (the known part of that) walking in the grey (grey, a grey
I'm tired of noticing and notiog; I'm exhausted with that grey; which
is what that grey means to me) street, this memory: I was passing the
table where somebody had left one ·0£ those transparent p las tic glasses, three quarters full of white wine (in the back closet Raven found
the saran tube full of them) with the window open behind it; the glare
on the interface between plastic and wine suddenly diffracted like an
oil:slick and the glass was full of color. IfI moved one way or the other
more than three inches, it became just greasy plastic full of urinecolored liquid. First I thought the prismatic movement would be lost
as soon as I went. But for the next hour, whenever 1 walked through
the kitchen, 1 could find the spot from which it looked like that again
eas>ly.
The idea stayed in my mind the same way, and 1 could find it just
by passing near.
I thought it would be good to try on Temple Avenue, but 1 couldn't find any street with that name on the sign.. So I walked down a
street as wide and as clean, with gates and doors and window-glass so
intact that only the
pewter sky told our
catastrophe. 1 saw a
lady in a black coat
and blue scarf cross
Writing this while taking, a crap; smallconsolations-expected a really unhealthy turd.
baloney yellow and spinach black after a node
of muCUs. Mercifully what Came was mostly liquid and left the water too murky to examine.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 697
at the corner; but she went into a side street; when I looked after her,
she was stepping into a doorway. 1 walked, excited and hollow and
knOWing my shape-how my body moved, my head a-jog on my
neck, the stagger in my one-boot walk-from the inside. Lamp posts
and doorways and fire hydrants came at me from the smokeI guess he was almost a block ahead, but for maybe a minute I
wasn't sure he was there, in the smoke. So I hurried.
He had short, black hair and wore a brown corduroy coat with a
woolly collar; it was cooler than usual, but because there was no wind,
I was still in my vest. His hands were in his pockets. The coat's belt
hung down on either side.
The belt was all I was staring at.
Just as I started to overtake him, 1 scraped my leg on some piece of
crating or junk lying on the sidewalk-I never did look back at what
it was. But it surprised hell out of me. 1 wonder now if I would have
done it if that hadn't happened: 1 mean, trying to ignore the surprising sting across my caU, maybe I also ignored that part of my head
that would have made me just hurry on past him, rellectiog on how
close 1 had come. (Does the City's topology control us completely?)
When I'd halved the distance, he glanced back. But kept walking.
1 guess he thought 1 was just going to walk past.
I grabbed his shoulder and spun him back against the fence bars.
"Hey ... !" he said. "What's your problem I "
I put the orchid blades right up against his throat. He flinched and
looked surprised.
"Give me everything in your pockets," I told him.
He took a breath. "You got it.' He wore glasses.
I dug into his pants pocket while he held his hands up. I brought
out three dollar bills. (I think an orchid point accidentally nicked his
neck and he flinched again.) "Turn around and let me check your back
pockets." He turned and I felt around under the lIap of his coat until
I realized his pants didn't have back pockets. 1 thought I might hit him
or cut him then; but I ,didn't.
I backed away and he turned to look at me. His mouth was pressed
together. As I stepped away, 1 realized his side pockets were much
deeper than I'd thought: 1 could see the clustered circles of change outlined low in the black denim.
He glanced past one raised hand to the left.
A guy was crossing the street, watching us. But when 1 looked, the
guylooked away.
698 Dhalgren
The man made a disgusted sound, dropped his hands, and turned
to go.
I gestured with the orchid and said, "Hey!·
He looked back.
"You wait here ten minutes before you move," I said, and took another step backward. "If you call for anybody, or try to come after me,
I'll cut your throat!" I turned and sprinted up the block; glanced back
once.
He was walking away.
I made it around the comer, went into a doorway to take off the orchid and put the three bills in my pocket. Then I stooped down and
rolled up my cuff to look at my leg. It was just the tiniest scratch, down
the side of my calf and back toward my ankle, like a swipe past a nail
or a broken board or a
out on the front steps, met Dragon Lady: Denim vest laced tight, arms
folded (making the laces above them look a little loose) ,looking pensive.
Haven't seen her in a while.
Back now.
Whats she been doing?
Nothing.
Where's she been?
Around.
I put my arm around her but she obviously didn't feel like being
mauled. So I dropped it and just walked with her.
As we circled the house, she relaxed a little, dark arms still folded.
Baby and Adam with you?
Yeah, they'll be here.
Reached the yard (telling her, "It's good too see you back," and she
smiled her slained-tooth smile) and delivered her up to the apes and
Tarzan who were goofing around there. The atmosphere cedes us a
day f.atureless as night. I didn't know what time it was; ,the noise
and raillery surrounded her as she
went to sit under
the ,tree, fists be-
!Ween her knees,
with a troubled look
L have to keep mentioning this timelessness because the phenomenon irritates the part of the
mind over which time's ,passage registersl so
ti:aat ·instants, seconds, minutes are painfully
real;
but less days and weeksare left·over noises from a dead tongue.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 699
that did not stay on anything. Wondering how (late? early?) it was, I
decided I would fix the sink in the service porch (because I'd gone into
the cabinet under the kitchen sink for something else and seen some
tools; again, topology preordinates) and after l'd turned off the water
and wrenched off the first nut, I decided I'd take the whole thing apart
and then see ifl felt like putting it back together.
I took the cap 0(( ,the bottom of the elbow drain and lots of hair and
purple gunk fludged out on the floor. Took the taps 0((. Should have
done that before I ,took the cap 0((, because there was a little surge of
rusty water out of each-that went down the drain and onto the floor.
Then I unscrewed the collars from inside the taps.
D-t came out, squatted, and watched a while, sometimes handed me
tools; finally asked, whimsically, "What the fuck are you doing?" and
I've lost a name. So? If the inhabitants of this
city have one thing in common, it is that such
accidents don't interest them; that is neither
!'auded here as freedom nor wailed as injury; it
IS taken as a fact ·of landscape, not personality.
helped me wobble
the sink from the
wall (standing suddenly when it almost
fell) on its enameled
claw and ball.
"I'm putting the sink back together," I told him because I'djust decided to.
D-t grunted and shoved at the bowl-back. The forejoints of his
thumbs are both crooked; which I'd never noticed before.
There was some string on the window sill, and I brought in a can
of putty from the kitchen. But when I'd pried up the lid with the
screwdriver, the surface was cracked like Arizona. And I didn't know
where any aU was. D-t came back with a bottle of Wesson, and I couldn't thinkof any reason why not. D-t settled back to watch.
"Now we could of got a place without no leaky sink," D-t said. "But
then I guess there wouldn't be nothing to do."
I laughed as much as I could holding the cold-water pipe up while
trying to screw the fitting back down over it.
I asked him something or other.
Don't recall his exact answer, butsomewhere in it, he said; " .. _ like
when I first got here, I used to walk along the street and know I could
break into just about aBY house I wanted, aBd I was just scared to
death ... "
We talked about that. I remembered my first walks in the streets.
(D-t said: ''But I broke in, anyway.") While we talked I recaR thinking: It is not that I have no future. Rather it continually fragments on
700 Dhalgren
the insubstantial and indistinct ephemera of then. In the summer
country, stitched with lightning, somehow; there is nO way to conclude; but here, conclusion itself is superfluous. I said to
D-t about: "What this place needs is a good wind, or a lightning storm.
To clean it out. Or thunder."
"Oh, man: D-t said. 'Oh, man-No! No, I don't think I could take
that. Not here," and chuckled (like, I suspect, someone under sentence). We really got into some talk. In that quiet way where you're
into the feeling, if not the information. Once he asked me how long I
thought I could keep it up, here, and I said: "I don't know. How long
can you?" and he laughed too. I was wrapping string around the joint
and the fastening on the other end of the cold-water pipe when someone in the doorway said: "Hi, Kid."
1 looked up.
Frank stood there looking like he didn't know whether or not to
put his hands in his potkets.
Reading over my journal, I find it difficult to decide even which incidents occurred first. I have
hysterical moments when I think finding that out
is my only possible hope/salvation. Also wonder
at some of the things I have not written down:
the day with Lanya when she took me to the city
museum and we spent from before dawn to
after dark sitting around in the reconstructed
1'8th century rooms ("We could live here, like
Calkinsl" and she whispered, smiling, "No. , .'"
and then we talked about a run here: and again
$he said, "No .• ," this time not smiling. And I
won't. But all the talking we did there, and wandering, growing hungrier and hungrier in the
pearl light through the ceiling panes because we
could not bear to leave), should make this the
longest and most derailed incident ,in this journal because it was where she showed me thing
after thing and told me about them, to make
them mean something for me; she became a
real' person, by what she knew and what she did,
mOre than anyway she ever could by what was
done to her, done to her, done:
which was so
easily the way I've always wanted to define her.
Wanting her to take Denny and the whole nest
there; and-holding a small ,painting she had
taken down from the wall to show me something about how the canvas was ,prepared in the
"Hello," I said
and went back to
the fixture.
IlHowl:re you doing?"
I grunted.
"Glad I found
you. Nobody seemed
to know where you
were. I wanted to
know if I could talk
w yo,. about something."
I was mad at him
for interruptillg;
also because, ignoring him, I had to
sort of ignore D-t.
"What do you
The doorkame
creaked; Frankshifted on the jamh.
Then the floorThe Anathemata: a plague journal 701 seventeenth century {"Christ, I used to spend weeks making black oil and Mereget! I'm sur- prised I didn't asphyxiate someone")-she said "Nol I don't think so. It's a.gamble enough with you. Not just yet. Maybe later," and re-hung the painting, upside down. We laughed. So I hung seventeen. paintings upside ....... IICome on! Stop . . ," she',insisted, but I did anyway. Because, I explained, anyone who comes along will notice them like this, frown, maybe turn them right-side up again. And will end up looking at them a, little longer. "I'm only doing it for the ones I like. " said, dubiously. "Well, okay. " But It IS more memorable unfixed. And to .that's important. (Only while I'm actually for ,an instant it is actually more vIvid ... ) So III stop here, tired. . Except to tell about that funny argument With Denny, which I still do not understand, where I thought I was going to kill the little bastard. And Lanya just seemed uninterested Which made me so mad I could have killed he; too. And so I spent an afternoon with a bottle of wine and Lady of Spain, bitching about the two of them, and passing the bottle back and forth-she had taken to wearing manY',ings- and we staggered to the Emboriki, daring each other to break in, which we didn't do but saying to her, as we strutted by, with our around each others' shoulders, lIVou're my only real friend here, you know?" all very but necessary. lhen we shouted: Motherfuckersl God damn shit-eating mother- fuckersl" echoed in the naked street. "Come on out from there and fight!" We were'hyster- up and down the curb, spilling wine. Yeah! Lady of Spain yelled. "Come on and-" .then burped; I thought she was going to vomIt, but no: "-down!" Het eyes were very red and she kept rubbing them with her ringed fingers. HeOme on down and--'" then she saw him: at the large window on the third floor .. He was holding a rifle under ohe arm. The pigeon chest, the too-long hair, even the blue, blue shirt that, from the street, I could boards; D-t shifted his squat. "Well. H Frank said, settling with the idea of talking to me while I wasn't looking at him, 'I was wondering-I mean: How could someone like me go about joining up with you guys?" I looked around at him to catch D-t already looking, and lookiug away. "I meaB," Frank went on, "is there some initiation, or something? Does somebody have to bring you in; or do you guys just get to- gether and take a vote?H "What do you want to know for?" I asked .• Aren't you happy oVer at the commune? Or is this just research for an article you're planning to do for the Times?" • An aTticie On how to get into the scorpions?" Frank laughed, "No. I just want to know be- cause . . . well,
702 Dhalgren
ten was too big: recognizing him made me feel
odd. "Hey," I said to Lady of Spain and told
her who he was. She said: "No shit?" ·1
laughed. Then she said, ·Wait a minute. Does
he recognize you?" But I began to shout again.
I called him every kind of name I could, be·
tween fits of laughing. Lady of Spain insisted:
"Look, he's got a gunl" nowhere near as drunk
as she'd been. "Kid, let's get out of here!" But
I kept up. He watched. Once he moved to rest
the butt on the sill, the barrel pointing straight
up. I think he was grinning. Finally we left.
The city is a map of violences anticipated.
The armed dwellers in the Emboriki, the
blacks surrounding them, the hiss from a
turned tap that has finally stopped trickling,
the time it takes a group who go out to come
back with bags of canned goods, packa!led
noodles, beans, rice, spaghetti-each ,is an
emblem of inalienable, coming shock. Butthe
clashes that do occur are all petty, disappointing, minor, inconclusive, above all stupid,
as though the city prevents any real anxiety's
ever resoilling. And the result? AU humanity
here astounds; alt charity here is graced.
Lady of Spain and I reached the nest, still
laughing, astounded we were alive.
In the back yard, tanya told me she had
taken Denny to the museum- "for a couple
of hours. We looked at all the paintings you
especially liked-and Denny turned them
right side up. So he could see them, of
course/I IISmug bitch/' I said. Sf:le said:
"Who? Me?" And Denny began to laugh as
though somehow the joke Were really on the
two of us, which had us both wondering. Then
he said they'd wandered around, he taking
her out to a place called Holland Lake. They
crawled into bed beside me, and we talked till
it grew .Iight, Denny being the only one of us
who doesn't ,realize how much easier that
makes liking one another. And when Oenny
did a lot of talking, it finally put me to sleepthough I wanted to stay awake-and woke a
little later, with them asleep too, in the familiar position.
things are getting a
little tight in the
park.» He glanced
back OUt in ,the hdl.
"We got some real
fwmy people around.
Although it looks a
little crowded here
too." He decided on
his pockets. "You
guys getting hungry yet? I probably
shouldn't mention
it, but John and
Milly are quile beholden to you since
you<\uithitting them
up for care pack.
ages."
"An oversight,' I
said.
"Shouldn't have
mentioned it.'
I turned back Ullder the sink, looked
for somethiog to do
but couldn't really
find anything, So I
kept looking.
·You guys seem
to have a real thing
going here. I'm not
happy with what's
going on around
me where I am. I
want to know where
I get my transfer,
where I can buy a
ticket-"
The Anathemata: a plague journal 703
We can survive so much. UOh, man," I
said. "I can't talk to
you about shit like
that now. I'm busy."
And crawling between them (more com·
fortable, I guess, than the familiar position
when all is said and done) went to sleep again
till Lady of Spain and Risa, laughing out in the
hall, woke us up; I hoped they would come in.
But they didn't.
"Sure Kid,:II came
out real quick, and
he stopped leaning
on the doorframe. "Maybe later. I'll just hang around ... till you have
some time. n
D-t handed me the string. "Hey, thanks," I told D-t, "but I don't
think I should pack that grease trap." So I didn't, but it was pretty
much all right anyway.
Glanced back.
Frank was gone.
So we scrubbed out the grease-streaked bowl, more or less quiet,
questioning such idiot work and finding the value-a chance to do
somethiog with D-t-disappeared, defined. Well, the sink wasn't
dripping.
Something (I heard it) was happening in front of the house. I listened, surprised (looked at D-t look up at me), to somebody get up, in
the front room, run out of the front doorI said. "Come on,» We went into the hall together. D-t
got ahead; I pushed by him out the front door; stopped on the
fourth step.
"jesus Christ!" Frank shouted. "Hey, watch it_in
"You want a chain, huh?" Copperhead, crouched, wound the links
once more around his fist, pulled
back, and swung again. "I'm gonna
wrap this one around your fuckin' neck!"
"God damn, man! Look, all I did was ... !"
Some in the loose circle glanced up at me; so did Frank, then
jumped back as Copperhead swung: "Hey-I"
Copperhead, concentrated as a pool player, raised his fist again.
"All R1GHTt" and I walked down the steps. "WHAT THE FUCK
ARE YOU DOING?" which got everybody's attention except Copperhead's. "COPPERHEAD-! Cut It Out!" thinking: This is going to be
the time when I have to tangle with ruIn. Thinking also: It's just not
worth it. But he hooked around and I snatched the end of his chain
and yanked. He let go and snapped his fingers back. It must have hurt
his hand because it sure as hell hurt mine,
704 Dhalgmt
I went up ,(0 Frank (who looked as scared of me as he was of Copperhead) and said, "What is this, huh? All right, what are you dOing
in this-"
"I didn't-" He started at some movement behind me.
I didn't turn. "I think you better get out of here .• It must have been
Copperhead in some feint. "Go on. Go on, now! Get going.·
He started to say, "Urn ...• and I realized how used I was to people doing what I told when they weren't doing anything else.
"Look," I said, "though you are making it harder and harder for me
to remember it, So far, you have been my most accurate critic; therefore you deserve some consideration. I'm giving you that consideration now: Scoot! n
Frank rorned,
went gingerly between Fireball and
Lady of Spain, who
broke the circle for
him.
I turned to Copperhead: 'You muSt
be really down on
meJ man. Because
I'm always coming
along to mess up
your fun, right?"
"Aw,Kid-" Copperhead rubbed his
beard with his wrist
-"I was nat going
to hurt him."
"You were just
gOing to SCare him.
Sure.' I saw-the Story
coming: Frank's annoying manner, too
blunt questions, a
jibe, a look; and a
violencecrystalli%ed
from the day's boredom.
California came back this evening. Must have
seen him three/five times before I noticed ....... we
were on the back steps-he'd hung both a gold
six-pointed star (Hebrew letters on it) and a black
swastika (edged ,in silver) on his light-shield
chain. Jack the Ripper, carrying, on about something, started to call California" ... a crazy Jewbastard ... " only
he saw the star, the bent cross.
,I could hear the shape the unspoke epithet
carved in the' silence. Then the Ripper went on
about something else. California, since he went
away. has his thin hands are tenser; his
bony shoulders sit more forwand; his blue eyes,
between strings of his long hair, are wider and
angrier. (How odd symbols areO I think the
change is like what I went through when I got my
chain of prisms, mirrors, lenses ... The Ripper's
sensitivity surprised me (he did call California a
Jew-bastard five 'minutes later) but then, the
derogatory ter
ms we hurl around here with such
seeming freedom are actually counters in a
plleated game, and the point was the Ripper'S.
Penalties for misplay can grow huge-recall the
beating 'Dollar took at Calkins'. The rewards? I
suspect, in this landscape, they are just as huge.
Am I just being pompous, or is the ,real and necessary information these epithets generate (making them a real and necessary part of Bellona's
own language) the reminder that it is often just
when we are most aware of the freedom of the
field in whiCh we moVe that our actions become
most culture-bound? .
The Anathemata: a plague journal 705
Copperhead began to tell it to me, insistently. (I tossed him his
chain and he caught and put it around his neck without breaking his
sentence.) So I motioned him to come on and, half listening, went up
the steps with him.
D-t, who'd watched from the top, stood with Dragon Lady, They
talked qUietly and intently as the guys filed past.
Passing her, Copperhead tried to broaden his anecdote to include
her. Maybe because of the small look she gave him (or maybe because
her eyes didn't really meet his at all) he finally went On by, just dropping his hand On her shoulder, and she nodded. And went on talking
to D-t. Which is a good introduction to why
over the charred grass stopped conversation. A climb across rocks and
among green brush jarred it loose again. Cathedral told Priest the
black stone building in the smoke was the Weather Tower.
I still don't see any vanes, aerials, or anemometers.
We came around a corner, left hips brushing head-sized stones,
right hips (elbows up)' scratched by bushes.
The man in the middle of the court was bent over a tripod. As we
came toward him, he looked up: Captain Kamp.
Who still didn't recognize me until we were on top of him.
" . .. Kid?D
"Hello, Captain.'
He laughed noW. "Now you fellows looked pretty ominous coming
across there.' He debated whether to give his hand for shaking. Which
Angel solved by giving his. They hooked thumbs.
"Angel," Angel said.'
The pink and brown fists locked, shook. Kamp looked like he'd
been expecting the biker shake; later he told me that was the first time
he'd seen it.
"Michael Kamp,· Kamp said.
"Cathedral," Cathedral said:
Shake.
"California," California said:
Shake.
u:pdest ... You're the astronaut, huh?n
Shake.
"That\; right."
"Spain."
706 Dhalgren
"That's lady of Spain," Priest amended:
Shake. Kamp got a sort of funny smile but figured he best not say
anything. Which was best.
"Tarzan."
Shake.
"Kid. n
We shook
And Kamp said, "Sure. I haven't forgotten you now," and everybody laughed. Because it had been so fOImal.
''What you gonna do with that?" Priest went to sit on the chipped
steps. He'd been complaining about the sore on his foot.
"That's a, telescope," Lady of Spain said. "The kind with a mirror,
right?"
"That's right." Kamp stepped to the other side.
"See," Lady of Spain said. (The telescope reminds me of a conversation with Lanya and a whole bunch at the nest I wanted to put
down.)
"What are yougonnado with it?" Priest asked, leaning forward to
bend the tOe of his sneaker up and down. His chain swung against his
brown sunken chest and out, clinking.
Kamp squinted at the clouds. 'Probably not much of anything, OccaSionally I've seen a few breaks in the overcast. It occurred to me,
now perhaps I might get a look at your sky here. After all those stories about double moons and giant sunS ... '
In the quiet, I thought about aM the times people had not said anything about them. •
"After al1-" you hear about voices breaking the silence? I learned
how strong that silence had been from the way his After all snapped
in my head-"l saw ... sOme ofit." How long, now, had that silence
gone on? "I thought I'd bring the telescope down here to the parkthey said the hill here was one of the highest points in the city-and
perhaps see if I could just check whether any planets were where
they're supposed to be. 1 found an Ephemeris in the library up at
Roger's. Only my watch hasn't been working all week None of you
guys happen to know what the date is, now, do you?'
When none of us answered, he sucked his teeth, turned back to the
white aluminum cylinder (black rings around the middle) and looked
down the open end. "WeI!, somebody'll come along who does, nOw."
I wondered if George or June knew.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 707
"The paper said it was November ninth,' California said, "this
morning. Ol
To which Kamp didn't even look up. "If the planets are where
they're supposed to be, that more or less means the Earth's where
supposed to be." He glanced aside long enough to grin. "In the face
of all this cosmolOgical confusion, finding that out should make everyone feel a little better."
"Suppose it's not?" 1 asked.
"I,' Kamp said, "think it is. But knowing it will make us all happier."
"I guess that's a pretty good reason," Angel said. He stepped up and
looked down into the tube. "Hey, I can see my face upside down in
there!"
"[ think it would be a good idea, politically, to be able to print in
the paper, now, that we know that much. It would calm things downsome people have gotten very upset. And I can see why." Kamp looked
up the same time Angel did; their eyes caught. "Now you boys-"
which he used as an excuse to look away at Lady of Spain and add an
inclusive nod-"aren' t interested in politics, I guess, but it seems to
me ... n
In the pause, Cathedral said: "You're into politics, huh?"
"I'm into ... politicS, I guess so now." His hands lay aCIOSS the
white tube. He moved the bones about inside his flesh as though it
were a glove. "But I think your Mr Calkins is a pretty conservative
politician. Now don't you?"
Cathedral, with dark thumb and forefinger, moiled his thick earlobe. A darker pucker where the gold ring went through meant he'd
only had it a little while.
"I'm sure he thinks he's radical. But I think I'm the radical and he's
the conservative." I thought he would laugh: he squinted at the clouds,
at the telescope. "Now I guess that's what I've been thinking."
"You're so conservative,' Lady of Spain suggested, "it comes out the
other way and gets radical?"
"No.' Captain Ramp laughed. "No. That's not it. Maybe I'm not really. , . into politics." He paused. "But it's JUSt that this is such a big
country now. Roger ... weJil, I guess it's hard for anyone to know ...
that it's such a big country.»
"Unless you've seen it," I asked, "from a space ship?"
"Rocket," he said. "No. No, thats not what I mean. The Megalithic Republic-now, the Megalithic Republics: the Republic of the Unit-
708 Dhalgren
ed States of America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the
People's Republic of China-they're very different kinds of political
entities from, say, France, Borneo, Uruguay, or Nigeria. The people
who live in small nations know it, but they don't know why. The people who live in the Megalithic Republics simply look at the little Ones
as alien, exotic, bewildering, but aren't even sure why the little ones'
histories read the way they do. Two hundred million people, ninety
per-cent literate, all of them speaking one language! Now hold that up
beside a country like ... " During his pause, I wondered how many
examples he had. "Greece, now. Only eight million people-less people in the country than in New York City. Guy from Macedonia can't
understand a guy from the Peloponnesus. Hell, the guy from the north
side of Crete can't understand a guy from the south side. My wife, she
said we should go there. And we stayed for six weeks. That WaS my
first wife noW. But there's no place in Europe where you Can go in a
straight line more than eight hours by mechanical transportation without running into a different language, different currency, a different
culture! How do they expect to teach three thousand yea·rs of European politics to American kids in American schools, or Russian kids
in Russian schools, in a land where you Can go a day by car in any direction and not cross a border? You have to have been there to understand. I mean, have any.o{ you ever been to Europe?"
Cathedral nodded.
Angel said, "I was in Germany, in the army."
"r never been there," California said.
urve never been," I echoed, remembering Japan, Australia,
Uruguay.
Ltdy of Spain said: "I haven't. "
But even two had undercut Kamp's point. "Yes, weill guess you
know what I mean now. America ... America's sO big. And Bellona's
one of the half-dozen biggest cities in America. Which makes it one
of the biggest in the world." He frowned, mostly at Cathedral. "But
you guys here, Calkins too,just have no idea how big that is, and how
different that makes the people in it."
"You going to be able to see anything with that?" I asked. "When
there is a break, it doesn't last very long."
Kamp mmmmed in agreement. "Yau don't need much ... information-like I was telling you once, back at the party? Mask out almost
everything: still, even a little bit will tell you an awful lot. " He looked
The Anathemata: a plague journal 709
at the sky again. The lines out from his eyes lengthened. His lips parted and thinned.
"Hey, we been in Europe," Angel said. "You gonna tell us about the
moon? You the only one here's been there."
"Shit, I seen that on television," Ltdy of Spain said. "Live. I never
seen anything in Europe on television. Except in pictures."
Kamp chuckled. "Now I was on the earth for thirty-eight years."
He looked down. "I was On the moon for six and a half hours. And
I've been back from the moon, well ... a handful more years. But that
six and a half hours is the only thing anybody is really interested in
about me, now. II)
"What was it like?" Tarzan asked, as though that followed perfectly froro what Kamp had said.
"You know?" Kamp stepped around the telescope. "It was like coming to Bellona."
"How do you mean?" Priest put both hands on the stone steps and
leaned forward, waiting to see whether what Kamp had said was from
hostility, or just a new thought: or both.
'When we got to the moon, Raw, we knew a lot about where we
were; and at the same time, we hardly knew anything about it at all.
And that's just what it's Hke here. After six and a half hours-' Kamp
mused, his eyes narrowing in ,the smoke-"it was time to go. And if I
can't figure out whare we are this evening, now, I think it will be time
for me to leave here too."
Ltdy of Spain looked at the sky, then at me-"Where would you
go?-" then at the sky again.
'Someplace where I Can tei:l where I am."
The sky was fused, side to side.
"Good luck," Cathedral said.
"I guess that's good-bye too, then," I said.
Priest stood up from the steps.
Kamp nudged one leg ofthe tripod with the toe of his shoe. "Maybe it is." The metal tip scraped awfully loud.
"So long," Cathedral said,
We walked down the hill.
Angel wanted to know what Kamp had said about information at
the party. I tried to
Speech is always in excess of poetry as print is
always inadequate for speech. A word sets imreconstruct. Which turned Angel on,
710 Dhalgren
ages flying through the brain from which au- and he began a sort
guries we recaU all extent and intention. I'm not of dithyramb about
a poet because I have nothing to give life to how much everymake it due, except my attention. And I don't thing, while we know if my wounded sort is enough.
People
probably do hear watches go tic-tok. But I'm walked through
sure my childhood clock went tic-tic-tic-tic-tic- brush and rocks and
tic-tic . .. Why do I recall this in a city without bushes, told him
time? What hai.y men find on their bodies is about the park; that
amazing. was much fun.
We came out of the trees, talking a lot to each other just as somebody jammed a log into the furnace. Sparks went high into the late,
grey afternoon; the smoke plume thinned.
"Heyl" John said and came over, through, and around the kids sitting and standing. "How are you guys? Howyou guys been?"
I watched the smoke.
Thinning. .
Two kids (pink tank-tops; long, straw-colored hair) hauled sleeping bags from under the picnic bench.
Overtaking John, Woodard"yellow as a leaf and woolly as ... well,
Woodard, came to a dead stop and blinked at me (us?). I think at first
he'd thought he knew us, but then wasn't sure.
I was going to say hello but John overtook him, now, ruming at the
boy's hair, and said, "Kid, I haven't seen you around for a long time."
His hands were just as clean, but his blanket-vest looked like he'd actually done something in it since the last I'd seen.
"How's it going?" I asked.
John gave a tepid grin. "About as well as it can, I guess."
I felt something was wrong; as if! was looking at a place I didn't recognize but should-or did recognize, even though I'd never seen it.
"Kid!" which was Milly.
They went on talking without giving me a chance to introduce the
others, which I thought was silly; but Milly and John did things that
way. Talking the most, Milly stepped forward over a sleeping bag
where an older guy sat up and began to rub bis glasses on the tail of
a Sweet-Orr worksbirt.
Then 1 figured, fuck it, they better know who everybody was so I
just said, loud enough to make them stop talking: "This is Cathedral.
And this is ... " going down tbe line. While I was doing that, I saw
this guy walk into the clearing With a gun under one arm-which was
what started the fight.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 711
And which, .after going through all this, I don't really feel like
describing again because I've been over it with so many people at
the bar and at the
nest already. Lady
of Spain was all enthusiastic and kept
asking where the
guy was from. John
and Milly I think
were going to say
they didn't know,
but Jommy said he
was from the Goddamn downtown department store, and
Milly said, "You
don't know hes from
the Emboriky for
certain" andJommy
said, Shit, he knew,
and that they'd already rUn them
from One side of the
damn park to the
other; which I didn't
even know abaul
"Man, It John. said,
beating my shoulder
and grinning, "You're
really crazy; . Kid;
youJre really crazy
... " He shook his
head, laughing like
something was very
funny. "Manl"
want the
carton?" Milly was
saying. "We should
give that food to
them. John. We
Second thoughts: Since there've been so
many repercussions, I should go into it once
more just to clear it up for myself. A few
things stick with me: like, they had the box of
food all ready for him, sitting up on the end of
the picnic table (like it used to be for Night·
mare). And he was wearing very high·waisted
khaki pants, a khaki shirt (army? marine? I
don't thin'k so),, and orange construction
boots-shirt,
pants, and boots all looked
brand new. But ·1 couldn't tell you the color of
his hair. Also: the rifle, which I mentioned right
off, didn't strike me as odd at the time. Until
he started talking and waving it around and
once pointing at the guy still sitting in the
sleeping bag. I was going through something
about maybe he was some loner friend of
theirs like Tak, and had I seen him before; and
where? I've told a couple of people since that
'he was somebody I'd met before, to sort of
explain that fee'ling away. I'm not sure now;
but for one moment I was certain it was the
guy who'd sat in the balcony that night at
George's. But now I'm just as certain (however
certain that is) it wasn't. Cathedral actually
moved first-something no one mentions
when they talk about it. I thought he was
going to take the food carton for himself. I
guess the guy did too; that was what made
him raise the gun.
What were the dozen people standing
around thinking?
What was I thinking?
I grabbed the barrel with one hand and
hammered the heel of the other against the
stock so hard I thought my wrist had green·
sticked. Thinking (all part of the first feeling of
displaced familiarity): I've done this before ...
No .•• ,I,'ve never done this before, but if I'm
ever going to, ,I've got to do it now! And if I
didn't get shot in the chest, it was because the
guy was too scared or just not used to killing
people. For which I'm very glad. I twisted,
with my arm on fire, and watched his face go
712 Dhalgren
used to give food to
Nightmare."
"Shit: Priest said.
·We gota whole cellar full of food."
Ileorne on) U I
said. on) let's
get out of here and
leave these poorass motherfuckers
a lone!" Which I delivered right atJohn
(and it went right
over his shoulder to
Frank who was sittingon the table beside the food carton
as if he was guarding it. And you
know, all the bastards kept grinning
right through) _ So
we left.
Angel kept prancing around and
started tugging on
me just like John
(Priest was carrying
the rifte and had
started examining
it) and I said: "'Man)
throw that fucker
away! You hear me?
Throw Ihat fucker
it ,On
something, nigger,
or I'll break your
black head!" He
smashed the stock
on a stone, '"yeah! fI.
from sur,prise to pain as his fingers wound in
the trigger guard.
"he gun cracked! I thought the explosion
had happened in my mouth. But the barrel
was pointing oVer my right shoulder. (If you'd
asked me -then, I would have said I felt the bullet tip my ear-but that's impossible, 1 guess.)
lhe gun droppedlfell/slipped(?) from him;
I swung it away, swung it back and wopped it
"gainst his hip. He staggered, grunting. He
started to come at me, but Lady of Spain
grabbed him; then Cathedral.
I hit him ,again in the stomach with -the butt
ofthe gun. Afterward, John, kept saying: "Kid, you're
crazYJ manl Man, you',re crazy, Kid!" in a
ysm of gleeful hysteria, while Cathedral etthe
five other al kept their shoulders near mine.
My thoughts were carbonated (yes, ,I, shouted
after the guy, when he got up and limped
away, "Get the fuck out of here and get your
own food! fT because it was the easiest thing to
say that would give what I did' a reason; but
while everyone was standing there yakking
about how tough it was getting hit up for food
all the time, and
maybe they wouldn't come
back for a while and leave them alone, I kept
thinking I shoul e;! just take the carton of food
with me [with t he stash under the house we
didn't need itl because we didn't need it.) but
-the detritus was: Take it; because that was the
only way to make them understand why my
reason for doing 'it was.
I forgot it-the carton.
I WaS halfway back to the nest with Cathedral and' the others going on loudly about how
cool'the whole thing was when I remembered
three times (and forgot) what I'd decided to
do. I told them about it, which took a lot of
energy to start. But they didn't understand
("Yeah! Yeah, that's what we should h"ve
done!" from Tarzan; and from Lady of Spain:
"That would've been all right, They wouldn't
of minded.") and kept yelling.
I'm. not a poet.
I'm not a hero.
But someti)Tles I,think these people will dis.
tort reality in, any way to make me one. And'
grunting, and twisted up the firing
chamber so it was
pretty much beyond use. I said:
"That'S no scorpion
The Anathemata: a plague journal 713
sometimes ,I think reality will distort me any
way to make me appear one-but that's insanity, isn't it? And I don't want to be crazy
again.
I don't.
weapon! A scorpions got a fucking sting!" and lifted up my orchid.
They liked that) just like John and· saying, "Man, you're something
elser"
"I should have taken their fucking carton."
"Yeah," udy of Spain said. "Yeah. Thats what we should have done."
Tarzan said: "Yeah. That would have been all right. They wouldn't
have minded."
"You're too much," Priest said again, and Cathedral laughed and
shook my shoulder.
They kept it up all the way into the nest. Tarzan and Priest came
in with me. Cathedral., udy of Spain, and Angel got stopped outside
where they began to tell the story. Well, I guess that was all right.
There were enough people around drunk-a bunch of nonmembers
who were apparently friends of Devastation or something, I didn't
care-to absorb it.
I was going down the han when Denny swung out of the living
room and grabbed my arm. "Hey-!" He was really excited.
I thought he was going to say something about what happened in
the park. "Hey what?"
He just blinked.
So I started down the han again.
He followed and said, "Lanya's in the room, in the loft but-" I
looked like I was about to go in-"1 think she's busy."
So I stopped.
Denny said: "You probably shouldn't go in.'
"What's she doing?"
'CBaUing.1:t
"Here?" I said, nOt that loudly. Beside being surprised, I remember
I thought it was not very cool for someone as down as she was on the
gang-bang bit (but baSically pretty together when it came to keeping
her thing in front of assaulting-type male personalities) to be making
it with One of the guys from the nest in my loft.
Somebody was coming up the hall from the john.
"Come 0"'" I said to Denny. We went out on the service porch.
714 Dhalgren
"Whos she fucking?' I knew the answer was going to be a surprise;
and also that there were six-no, five guys I would particularly not
like it to be: Spitt, Copperhead, Thruppence,Jack the Ripper, or Fireball; because they were all the sort who, through malice or ignorance,
might try to make it into something unpleasant.
"Some guy I picked up downtown."
I was surprised. "-you picked up?' I hadn't expected to b. relieved, though. "YoU! balled him too?"
"Naw. Naw, it was her idea. D
"This sounds very familiar," 1 said. "What do you mean, her idea?'
"She asked me to go out and find somebody who wanted to fuck
her for money ... for five dollars."
"Whose five dollars?" I asked. "His or hers?"
Tarzan and D-t came up the steps and through the porch door,
Tarzan to listen, D-t to wait for Tarzan to finish listening.
"It's hers now." Denny grinned. "She said she was listening to us
talk about hustling, I guess, a lot, and I guess she was curious. Christ,
was it hard to find someone with any money at-"
"We didn't talk about hustling a lat."
"Didn't stop her from listening. She told me she was curious. She
said she wanted to try it.'
"Yeah, yeah. Sure." I cuffed his shoulder. "I just want to know why
you're not in ,there doing your thing."
"Shit.' Denny scowled. "The guy's a creep. He didn't seem so bad
when I met him. But he's a creep, you know?"
"Jesus Christ." Tarzan leaned against the sill of the screenless window frame. "You let your old lady ... ?" and stopped; probably because of the way I looked at him.
I said: "Let her what? 0
"You know;. mess around with . . well ... you know. 11
"Tarzan," I said:, "if myoId lady wants to fuck a sheep with a dildo
strapped to her nose, that is largely her concern, very secondarily
mine, and not yours at all. She can Cuck anything she wants-with the
possible exception of you. That, I think, would turn my stomach.
I took the orchid from the my
neck, I raised my hand and slipped it into the
harness, and the sky darkened outside the windows, the sky roared outside the window
screens, and I snapped the collar oli my wrist,
and the light split in two, each arm growing,
Yes, that, I think, I
would not be able to
. take. I'm going to
kill you." On my
hand-it swung up
at Tarzan's chestThe Anathemata: a plague journal 715 ragged·rimmed. with magnesium bright edges, arching the sky, and I swung my hand up at Tarzan's chest. was the orchid. "That's what I'm go- ing to do. I'm going to play tic-tac-toe on your face, and them I'm-" "Hey .. ." Tarzan whispered, "you're crazy ... !" looking very scared, looking at Denny, then D-t; but they had stepped away-and he looked scareder. "Yeah?' I nodded. "You didn't know I was crazy?" I held the clutch of blade-paints right in front of his left tit. While everybody held their breath, I thought: It would be easier here than any place else. Then I said: "AW; shit! Run, motherfucker!" Tarzan looked confused. I dropped my hand. "I want to see you runl And that's the last I want to see of you till after the sun comes up tomorrow. Otherwise, I will beat the shit out of you, carry your broken, bleeding, and un- conscious body back to your mothers and fathers door sill, apartment nineteen-A, and leave you there! n "They don't live in .... Then his mind cliCked back to where he was; he sighed-I guess it was a sigh-and lunged for the door. He collided with a pigeon-chested man in the bluest shirt I've ever seen ("Hey, watch it! You okay ... ?") and fled down the hall The man looked confused too. Not that his hair was long; but for the type of person he was, your first thought would naturally be: He needs a haircut. "She said," he said, "I should go out this way ... ?" 'Okay,' Denny said. "Thetes the door.' Dragon Lady had Come up the steps and was slanding outside it, watching. "I gave her the money. Hey, thanks a lot. That was really nice. Maybe I'll be back." He looked at me, then looked just a little more confused. Dragon Lady opened the door for him and he hurried down into the yard. She looked after him, then let the door dose, but stood out- side on the top step. I looked at the orchid. It isn't despair. That vanishes with enough laugh- ter and reason. I have both ofthose a-plenty. I guess most people, when all is said and done, lead lives as interesting as they can possibly bear. But I don't remember putting it on. I, don't. I don't remem- ber putting .t on. 1 took it of(. "You like him,' I asked, "I)-t?"
714 Dhalgren
"Who's she fucking?" , knew the answer was going to be a surprise;
and also that there were six-no, fi'Ve guys, would particularly not
like it to be: Spitt, Copperhead, Thruppence,jack the Ripper, or Fireball; because they were all the sort who. through malice or ignorance,
might try to make it into something unpleasant.
"Some guy , picked up downtown."
I was surprised. "-you picked up?" I hadn't expected to be relie'Ved, though. "You bal'led him too?"
"Naw. Naw, it was her idea. II
"This sounds 'Very familiar," I said. "What do you mean, her idea?"
"She asked me to go out and find somebody who wanted to fuck
her for money ... for fi'Ve dollars.'
"Whose five dollars?lI I asked. U.Ris or hers?'1
'ifarzan and D-t carne up the steps and through the porch door,
Tarzan to listen, D-t to wait for Tarzan to finish listening.
"It's hers now." DenIlY grinned. 'She said she was listening to us
talk about hustling, I guess, a lot, and I guess she was curious. Christ,
was it hard to find someone with any money at-"
"We didn't talk about hustling a lot.'
"Didn't stop her from listening. She told me she was curious. She
said she wanted to try it."
"Yeah, yeah. Sure." I cuffed his shoulder. "I just want to know why
you're not in there doing your thing."
·Shit." Denny scowled. "The guy's a creep. He didn't seem so bad
when I met him. But hes a creep, you know?"
"Jesus Christ." Tarzan leaned against the sill of the screenless window frame. "You let your old lady ... ?" and stopped; probably beCause of the way 1 looked at him.
'said: "Let her what?"
UYou know;. mess aroun.d with ... well . .. you know. D
"Tarzan,"' said, "if my old lady wants to fuck a sheep with a dildo
strapped to her nose, that is largely her concern, very secondarily
mine, and not yours at all. She can fuck anything she wants-with the
possible exception of you. That, I think, would turn my stomach.
I took the orchid from the chain around my
neck, I raised my hand ancd slipped it into the
harness, and the sky darkened outside the windows, the sky roared outside the window
screens, and I snapped the collar on my wrist,
and the ,jight split in two, each arm growing,
Yes,that, I think, I
would not be able to
. take. I'm going to
kill you." On my
hand-it swung up
at Tarzan's chestThe Anathemata: a plague journal 715 ragged-rimmed, with magnesium bright edges, arching the sky, and I swung my hand up at Tarzan's chest. was the orchid. "That's what I'm go- ing to do. I'm going to play tic-tac-toe on your face, and them I'm-' "Hey ... " Tarzan whispered, "you're crazy ... !' looking 'Very scared, looking at Denny, then D-t; but they had stepped away-and he looked scareder. "Yeah?" 'nodded. "You didn't know' was crazy?" I held the clutch of blade-points right in front of his left tit. While e'Verybody held their breath, 1 thought: It would be easier here than any place else. Then I said: "Aw, shit! Run, motherfucker!" Tarzan looked confused. r dropped my hand. "' want to see you run! And that's the last' want to see of you till after the sun comes up tomorrow. Otherwise, I will beat the shit out of you, cany your broken, bleeding, and un- conscious body back to your mothers and father's door sill, apartment nineteen-A, and leave you there!)t "They don't li'Ve in ... " Then his mind clicked back to where he was; he sighed-I guess it was a Sigh-and lunged for the door. He collided with a pigeon-chested man in the bluest shirt I've ever seen ("Hey, watch it! You okay ..• ?") and fled down the hall The man looked ·confused too. Not that his hair was long; but for the type of person he was, your first thought would naturally be: He needs a haircut. "She said," he said, "I should go out this way ... ?" 'Okay, n Denny said. "There's the door.' Dragon Lady had come up the steps and was standing outside it, watching. "I ga'Ve her the money. Hey, thanks a lot. That was really nice. Maybe I'll be back.' He looked at me, then looked just a little more confused. Dragon Lady opened the door for him and he hurried down into the yard. She looked after him, then let the door close, but stood ,out- side on the top step. , looked at the orchid. It isn't despair. That vanishes with enough laugh- ter and reason. I have both of those a-plenty. I guess most people, when all is said and done, lead lives as interesting as they can possibly bear. But I don't remember putting it On. I don't. I don't remem- ber putting .t on. Hook it off. "You like him," I asked, "D-t?"
716 Dhalgren
"Who?" D-t said. "Tarzan? Man, he's okay. He just don't know
when to keep his mouth shut. That's all. n
"You made him piss all in his pants," Denny said. Then he laughed.
"You see that? He was getting wet, all down the side of his leg.· He
gestured at his own thigh.
"Huh?" I said.
"He wet all over himself. n Denny laughed again, sharp, and barking, like a puppy.
"1 wish I'd seen it,· I said. "It would have made me feel better."
"I ... don't mind Tarzan," Denny said.
"Look, manl n f) .. t said. "Tarzan's just a kid. He don't know any ...
thing."
"Shit!" I slipped the orchid back on my neck again. "He's older than
Denny!"
"He comes," D-t said, "from a very strange family. He's told Some
of us all about them. You got to make allowances."
"They're not that strange," I said.
"I mean," D-t said, ".hey didn't teach him too much. I mean about
the way things are."
"Yeah?" I took a very large breath. "Maybe what gets me is how
much his family reminds me of my own."
Then I went down the hall and into my own room.
Lmya, visible down to her nose, looked over the edge of the bed
like a cartoon Kilroy.
"Hello," I said. are you? II"
"When I hea'rd you come in," she said, "I thought Denny would
keep you in the front room. That's why I sent the guy out the back.·
I climbed up into the loft. ,
She sat up and made room; she was wearing her jeans, but they
weten't buttoned yet. "You know what turned him on most? That I
was a chick who baned scorpions," she said immediately. "That was
all that really interested him. He was nice enough. But I could have
been a piece of liver one of you guys had jerked off in; he would have
been just as happy." She touched my knee, tentatively. "I mean, I don't
mind being a ... what do they call it, 'a homosexual bridge' ifI enjoy
both ends. Really-,he was too funny."
"1 was going to ask you,· I said, "whether you had completely lost
your mind. But coming from me, 1 suppose, the question is presumptuous to the point of quainmess."
"1 don't think I'm out of my mind." Shdrowned. "To finish up the
The Anathemata: a plague journal 717
fantasy, 1 should turn this-" she pulled a five dollar bill from under
her knee- "over to you. Or Denny ... " She sucked in her lower lip,
then let it go. "Actually I'd like to keep it."
"Fine by me," I said. "Just don't get into this money thing too seriously. You'll end up like Jack. "
lilt isn't the money,'" she insisted. "It's a symbol. n
"That's just what I mean.·
"I think you should take your' own advice."
"I try," 1 said. "Hey-this wasn't intended as some kookie way to
get back at me for mugging that guy in the street?"
"Kid!» She sat back. "You just shocked me for the first time since
I've known youl»
"Tread delicately," I said. "Where do you come off with this shit
about me shocking you?"
"I didn't even think of it. I mean, how are they even comparable?
I mean what would ... Wowl Is that what you thought?"
"No," I said. "I didn't know. So I asked." We sat for a few seconds
rather glumly. Then I said: ·Was he any good?" '
She shrugged. "It's five bucks."
Then, becallse there was nothing else to do, I began to laugh. She
did too. I put my arms around her and she sort of fell into them, still
laughing.
"Hey!" Denny came up over the edge. "He was a real creep, huh?
I'm sorry. Some guys you get, they aren't so bad. Some are even pretty nice. I fig1lred, you know; ifI'mgonna get some john set up for your
first time, you know, I should find somebody nice. I thought he was
nice when I brought him back here but-what's so funny?"
Which got us going all the harder.
Denny crawled behind us. "I wish you'd tell me what's so funny
about trickin' with a creep like that?"
"While we're skirting the subject," I got myself together enough to
ask, "have you balled any of the other guys in the nest?"
Lanya wriggled a little in my arms. "In the nest? Well, not here-"
"Where did you ball 'em?" Denny asked, rather sharply.
"Who," I asked, "did you ball?" I guess I was surprised again.
"Reve1ation, 1'l Lanya said.
I nodded.
" . .. and. well, Copperhead. D
ClJesuS,7:1 Denny said. "When?b
Lanya raised a forefinger to bite on the green polish. "You remem-
718 Dh111gren
ber the night of Kid's party. when he went off to Cumberland Park, during the fire, and found those kids, with George? You'd wandered off
somewhere, Denny; and I was just sitting aroulI.d here talking with
everybody. Gladis and I were telling them about the House-that place
where aU the girls stay? They were very interested. So finally Gladis
and I took Copperhead, Spitt, and Glass over-that's where I pick up
my birth-control stuff, anyway. The evening is a linle hazy; but as I recaU, Revelation wandered in just a little Iater-" She sat up, scowling
at her lap. "Spitt retired early with a young lady he met right awaythey just went upstails. And Glass wasn't feeling weU so he left to cOme
back here. But Copperhead and Revelation stayed around downstairs
with the rest of us-Dragon Lady had come over, and everybody was
yakking about old times-and got incredibly stoned. And-" She
paused, her expression between consideration and confession- "eventually; I baUed them. And-" she nodded at Denny- "your little girl
friend there balled them. And Gladis balled them. AlI.d Filament. And
Dragon Lady. And, all in all, about-" she raised her fist and began
opening it, finger at a time; raised her other fist- "nine other women
balled them too. Not
in that order: I was
fifth or sixth.'
Denny said slowly and wondrously;
"Wow ... !"
"It was very funny.· ianyadropped
her shoulders. "IreaUy thought the two
of them had flipped
out or something, at
first. I was sort of
scared for them. I
don't ,think they
couId have stood up
and walked. It was
almost like they
were in some sort of
half-trance. Revelalion was lying on
his back crying
In the middle of a corrective complaining about
Risa'sl Angel's joint cooking effort, Lanya turned
to me as I came into the kitchen and said: "Kid,
I had a thought, about your memory thing.'
"You all full of thoughts," Angel said.
"Whyn't you shut up and let us cook?"
"She's just helpin'," Risa said.
"And she knows I'm just jokin'/' Angel said.
"Don't you?"
"1'11 shut up,' Lanya said'.
I sat on a corner of the kitchen table.
'What's your idea?" A piece of silverware fell
on the floor.
"Actually-" Lanya picked it up- "you have
an amazing memory! I was snooping in your
notebook again-forgive me, and I know you
will: but your memory for conversation is practically photographic!"
"No it's not, " I told her.
"1 said 'practically.'"
"No," I said again. "About a third of any conversation I write down is just paraphrase."
"Being able to remember two thirds of what
people say, even a few minutes after they've
said it, is very unusual. :Even your account of the
through most of it.
That part didn't
turn me on too
much. But it got
some of Ihe ladies
off, and howl And
he didn't lose his
hard-on."
I was surprised
and I was curious:
"Did they come?U
"Maybe a couple
of times at fYst. I
think. But after that,
they were just permanently up. Nobody gave 'em a
chance to go down.
You just did anything you wanted
with them. And
anyone who was interested did."
The Anathemata: a plague journal 719
night in the park; and you told me you hardly remembered any ofthat."
"I just wrote down what you said happened."
"If you don't have the lines right, you've certainly got the feeling! And with my hustling escapade, you've got all the lines. Those I remember."
I said: "You read that too?"
• And also your accounts of some of the talks
we've had together. I don't know how they
would stack up next to a transcript, but it's still
impressive. "
"50 what's your idea?"
"Just that, maybe, since you've got such
memory for details. it has something to do with
your losing track of whole periods of time or ...
weil, you know."
"That's so.interesting," I said, "I think I'll forget it right now."
"She's just tryin' to help!" Risa said from the
stove, clashing pot tops.
"And she too knows I am joking," I said.
"But even if you're right, so what?"
Of course I didn't forget it, witness this. Still,
suspect my
highly creative renderings are
more convincing than accurate, no matter what
she says-I think (hope?).
"All girls?" Denny asked.
Lanya nodded.
"Shit."'
Lanya leaned against me. "I've never seen men in a state like that
before. The whole thing was really very dyke-y." She crossed her arms
under her breasts. "I dug it. It was a little scary. But it was ... an experience."
"You're just having experiences one after the other, aren't you?"
The first thing 1 thought of was what Risa had said to me that day out
in the yard; what I found myself grinning at was that the possibility
of a genital expedient for laking her suggestion left me just as dubious as an anal one about whether or not I wanted to go through something like that. Oh, weH; maybe Some people can't havee"erything.
Am writing this comment on what Lanya said
about the girls shagging the two guys at the
house right after finishing ptrtting down myaccOl:lnt of our chaos and confusion with the
Lanya grinned up
at me-"Um-hm"
-and kissed my
nose.
720 Dhalgmt
boriki (with Jack, wouldn't you know, b eing that
much help and making that much trouble!) because a lot of what happened there, what we
said to them, what they said to us, pushed my
mind. back to it. I note that Copperhead and Revelation are ptetty'much exclusively-interested-ingirls guys; remember from last night (slgntflcant
in terms of today?) Revelation politely trying to
tell a pretty drunken Angel: Really, it WaS nothing personal but, no, he didn't want to fuck
around with him, and no, he had never really
tried it before, and no he didn't want t o, at least
not now; and the two of them went like this,
quietly out on the service porch, for half an hour.
The truth, of course, is that Revelation was vastly flattered by that mucn attention from someone that much quicker than he is and wanted to
extend it as much as possible. (Did we think by
paying them serious attention we were going to
flatter them into getting their foot off our
necks?) I think, sometimes, the difference is that
they are Sure that any sodal structures that arise
grow out of patterns innate to The Sex Actwhatever that is; while we have seen, again and
again, that the psychology, structures, and
acoutrements that define any sex act are always
internalized from soda I structures that already
exist, that have been created, that can be
changed. All right; Let me ask the terrible question: Could it be that all those perfectly straight,
content-with-their .. exual-orientation-in-the·world,
exclusive-heterosexuals really are (in some iII-defined, psychological way that will ultimately garner a better world) more healthy than (gulp ... 1)
us? Let me answer: No way! The active ones (of
whichever sex) are denser and crueler. The passive ones (of whichever sex) are Ilazier and more
self-satisfied. In a society where they are on top,
they cling 'like drowners to their active/passive,
male/female, master/servant, selflother set-up
not for pleasure, which would be reasonable, but
because it allows them to commit or condone
any lack of compassion among themselves, or
with anyone else, and that <at least in this sodety, as they have set it up) is immoral, sick, and
evil; any madness is preferable to that. And mad-
'ness is not preferablel
"What does your
Madame Brown think
about all this?" I
asked.
"That I lead a
wild and fascinating life."
"Oh." I nodded.
"She just wonders how I manage
to get to school
every day on time."
"How do you manage to get to school
every day on time?"
Lanya shrugged.
"Just conscientious,
I guess."
uJesus!!I Denny
sat back, his haDds
in his lap. 'You
gang-shagged Reve.
lotion and Copper.
head! Hey-who
was better, Pinky or
the nigger?"
"Neither of them
-" she leaned for.
ward and kissed: Denny's nose-«was as
sweet as you. b
"And by the way,'
Denny said, ·where's
myfive bucks?"
I cuffedhim. "Hey,
you want to hear
what happened to
me today?"
"Itl; my five bucks.
babes!' Blnya said.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 721
"Aw, shit! I went out in the damn street to pimp the fuckin' john-"
"Look, shut up!' I told them. "Listen." Then I described what had
happened back in ,the park. I thought it was funny. But they both
thought it was pretty serious, while we talked about it.
We talked about it a long time too.
Three conversations in which t.anya took part her last rew days here.
(Stayed overnight: which I liked. Maybe I'm ready to go spend some
time at her place? The nesting instinct is not the same as the homing
one. Which pales first?) She was talking with Gladis when I came into
the yard:
"Oh-'" and ran up to me, blocked me hallway down the steps.
1 focused on hert as on a memory of mountain rain, autumn light,
sea fizz.
(She has green eyes!)
The most natural thing, she turned me around on the steps and led
me back to the porch-when I realized I was being led, she pulled a
litde harder; urged, "Come on," and took me into the loft room:
"Where's your notebook? Or your new poems, anyway."
"Huh? I thought you wanted to fuck. "
"Oh, if you want-" imitating another kind of girl, then she
laughed at the imitation's success-"here!" The notebook corner stuck
over the 10ft's edge; she pulled it dOwn. Two loose pages fell
She picked them up. "CaDI have these to take home?"
"Sure," I said, "-no; not ,that one," and took back the sheet of blue
paper (from the package of stationery Raven brought home).
She folded the page I'd left her and put it in her shirt pocket. I put
the othorinside the cover and slid the notebook back up on the bed.
"Why do you want these?"
"Why do you write them?"
"I don't know ... any more.'"
"Ditto," she said, disturbed; which disturbed.
"Hey,' I asked. "You haven't seen Mr Calkins again recendy, have
you?"
"No ... 1" in a way that asked why I'd aske<i
"I mean this isn't his idea ... to get my new poerns from me? You're
not just keeping them for somebody else?"
·Of.course not. Ijust thought I had less chance ofiosing them than
youdi<i "
722 Dhalgren
"Mr Calkins talked to me about stealing them. I thought he was joking-you haven't showed them to anybody?"
"Of course not ... n Then she said: "Would itbeso awfulifI had?
I did read one-a few to Madame Brown. And a friend of hers who
came over that night to visit.'
"It wouldn't be awful."
"You look unhappy about it, though."
"I don't know. rm JUSt confused. Why did you read them? You just
liked them?"
"Very much. Everett Forest-Madame Brown's friend-asked me
to, actually. We were talking about you, one night when he had
dropped over. It came up that I had some of your >Inpublished work;
he was very am:ious to see it. So I read three or four of my faVOrites.
I suppose-" she said and sat down on the motorcycle'S seat "-this
is the part I shouldn't tell you: He wanted to copy them. But I didn't
think he should. : . Kid?"
"'there.s a lot of people in Bellona who are very interested in practicallyanyand everything about you."
"There aren't a lot ·0£ people in Bellona," I said. "Everybody keeps
telling me this; what are they interested in me jar?"
"They think you're important, interesting ... maybe some combination ofthe two. Make copies of your poems? I know people who, if
I gave them your laundry list, would type careful reproductions as if
they were some univerSity library or something."
"I don't have a fucking laundry list. I don't even have any laundry,"
I said. "Who?'
'Well, Everett for one. When I told him you sometimes left your
notebook over at my place he practically had a fit. He begged me to
let him know next time you left it so he could look through it and
maybe make a-"
"I'd break your head.'
"I wouldn't do that." She moved on the seat. "r wouldn't."
"'there's just not enough else for people to be interested in in this
city.1i
"I think,' she said, "you've got it. But even though I wouldn't let
him go snooping in your journal, I still think your writing this down
bores me; no, it makes me angry. It didn't make me angry when she
and I were talking about it, it was flattering. Its rehearsal, however, is
maddening. 1 enjoy having fantasies about these things, thinking about
them-but as a
game. (Haven't l?)
There's no reason
not to enjoy them
that way anymore.
But since the publication of Brass Orchids I sometimes
find myself saying
to myself: "All right.
I want to stop playing this game and
go try another one
for a while. Lord, let
me think about
The Anathemata: a plague journal 723
My sensibilities have grown inflamed as our
giant sun. I am writing poems now because
there is nothing else to read except the newspaper, discussing for pages the rumors and
ephemera that fume
through the city.
How can this go on
when such moons
rise and such suns
set? I am living this
way because the
horror here seems
preferable to life in
Tarzan's family.
Bullshit! Only I felt like
that when I wrote itno: I felt something,
and thought those
words the proper ashes
of the feeling as I
searched the smolderings. But they were
only smoke. Now I cannot tell whether the feeling itself was misperceived or merely its record inaccurate!
something else!" And I can't. Thats a much meaner version of the terrifying morning beneath the tree. But the truth is, most of the poems
in the book were written before I came to the scorpions. (Which ones
were actually written afterward?) The other irony is that the one time
I really was their leader was when I made them help me getJune's and
Tarzan's brother out of the shaft. Everything since has been the concretizing of SOme fantasy begun then-and in their minds, not mine.
Have I lost by the realization? For (arbitrarily?) precious sanity's sake
I have to think at least I've learned.
When you get water from either the kitchen or the bathroom or the
service-porch tap, bubbles form around the sides of the glass, but not
evenly about the whole surface. They make a band with a definite bottom edge, but peter out up the side. Have noticed, over the last several days, the line star.ts higher and higher. Must ask Tak if this means
something.
To the next conversation, then; maybe better luck:
I stopped outside the kitchen door because I heard them talking inside. Through the screening I saw Lanya sitting on the table, her back
against the wall, Gladis and pretty much all the apes (no Tarzan); also
D-t leaning against the icebox and Glass standing in the living-room
doorway; and Spitt just behind him, to the other side. A loud discussion; and umya's voice cut over (she leaned forward, looking around):
"I have never-no, wait a minute! Wait. I have never seen a bunch less
interested in sex than you guys! No, listen! I mean for guys who don't
have anything else to do. Really, I'm not kidding. When I was in col-
724 Dhalgren
lege, or practicdly any place, any job I've ever had; or guys I've just
known-seen a bunch who were less interested in getting laid-"
«1 don't see why you're complaining!" from Jack the Ripper.
"I'm not," Lanya said. "But I mean, I spend maybe half my time
here. Maybe more than half. And 1 think 1 know you guys pretty
weJ.rl-ft
And D-t: "No, now you wait a minnte! Hey, now you wait-"
Lanya finished in the silence: "1 was juSt curious why, that's all n
"Now wait." D-t repeated. "We got a verY strange and funny group
of people here. And 1 guess we don't ralk about itlhat much because
you have to be verY careful you know? VerY polite."
"l don't just mean making jokes about sex," Lanya said. "But even
that, when you come down to it. You'll get really foul for ten, twenty
minutes. Then nothing for a day, two days-"
"You mean tiNnking and figuring how to get laid?" Raven said.
"Yeah, 1 know what she means."
Spitt said: "I don't have to talk about it. 1 get mine," and looked at
Glass to corroborate him.
Glass, hands behind him on the wall, just leaned back a little more
watching (Spitt and Lanya were the only whites in the room), curious, as though the discussion was going on all for him. .
"There are just very different kinds of people here," D-t said. "For
me, maybe, what she said is true. I just never been that interested in
sex, I guess, compared to some people.. 1 told a friend of mine once I
jerked off about maybe twO, three times a year. And got laid about the
Same. He said that was verY strange-"
'Yeah, that's strange!" Jack the Ripper hollered, and people laughed.
"Spider over there, see-he!;. what ... ? Ten years younger than I
am? And hel; down at the park, practically everY God-damn night it
looks to me, getting his pipes swabbed out by the guys sneaking
around the bushes-"
"God damn-" Spider said, uncomfortably.
.We just got verY different people," D-t went on, "who like verY
different things. In very dilTerent ways. People like me and Gladis, say.
WtIre pretty much exclusively interested in the opposite sex, and
then, one at a time and rarely.'
"Three times a yea .. , baby," Gladis said, her inflection swinging
down low as it could get, "now I don't know whether I'm all that much
like you?" and up again.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 725
Which tickled the Ripper.
·SiNt," D-t said. "You know 1 used to think 1 was normal. But then
we got guys like Jack the Ripperwho are interested in anything."
Spider said, sullenly: "I'm interested in anything."
niggert D-t said, "you'd be interested in a clam if it smiled at
you and promised not to bite!"
Spilt added over the laughter, " ... and e".nthen, I don't know!"
which 1 don't think anybody really heard.
"Then we got the groupies-" D-t went on.
"Groupies!" from Glass, laughing for the first time. "Is that what
you call us?:rI'
"I mean you guys just aren't interested in anything less than a full
scale encounter group-grope-"
"Aw, man, fl from Glass, just wish you could-11 and I didn' t
hear the rest because:
Tarzan asked: "What!; gomg on in there?"
I glanced back. "Nothing."
But some of the guys inside had seen us through the screen. A
couple more turned to look. So I opened the door and went in, Tarzan
follOwing. Lanya was snlliaughing. Edging Thruppenceover on the
rabie, 1 sat next to her.
"With so many different types, see,· D-t sa.id,getting Lanya's attention back, "you have to be very polote: When we live this close.
And that meanS you don't talk too much. You just do it when it's
around to be done and the rest of the time you talk about something
else.r:1
Tarzan stayed in the dootWa}l his back to the screen, as outside now
as Glass had been before.
Laughter spilled them into different subjects (food, wouldn't you
know): Thruppence said we had stuff in the cella.: that we hadn't
known about till now because nobody had thought to look, till he'd
gone down that morning. He took some of us out to show us. There
was nO real cellar door; just a trap-Window, planked over, and a busted Yale lock hanging from the hasp. It let you into a damp, four-anda-half foot dugout that went under half the house where, besides all
the crates of tin cans-some with mildewed labels-was the fuse-box
and the hot-water heater, which Ire-lit.
Later a couple ·of people took baths.
I wiSh they'd continued the sex discussion. It hadn't felt finished.
726 Dhalgren
I wondered if it was ,rhe advent of me (the Boss) or Tarzan. (the OddbaH) that had shifted it; or simply the balance in the cream-to-coffee
ratio_ Out of conceit, I decided it must have been Tarzan.
Revelation, with his ash-pale hair, his gold chains, his pink, pink
skin, polarizes a black bunch when he is the only white among them
the same way Lady of Spain, blacker than Spider, high-assed, with little, low tits (from jokes the others make, she's of West lndiandescent),
polarizes a white group when she is the sole black: Visually.
Tarzan, however, so often the only blue-eyed blond among the apes
(now the official name for the sub-group of five out of the fifteen!
sixteen blacks in the nest [Raven, Jack the Ripper, Thruppence,
Angel, Spider)) polarizes them in a very different way. His fawning
fascination, his near-belligerence, and generd lack of use for .anyone
white makes it impossible to see him/them without a whole aura of
sexuaVpolitical resonances, which they carry like ,their lights. (Two
thoughts-First) Even so, everyone seems more or less able to absorb the situation with tolerance and hardly a comment. (Second:)
With all these whacked-out spades, there doesn't seem to be Qne
among them, man or woman, in a similar pOSition with a white group
(Glass, triumvirate with Spitt and Copperhead, seems a very different thing. Why?) Perhaps the nest (or the House) would be a good
place for June after all-after all, I can put up with Eddy. (Or can I?)
Pretty soon it broke up around the ceHar window and got back together in the yard ... But we never did get back to talking about sex.
Oh, well: that politeness. I guess Lanyas right.
Third conversation started in the loft. I was on my back; Lanya was
leaning on my chest, looking in my mouth while I talked about something. In the middle of a sentence, she got my mind off what I was
saying, saying: "I could come from just the smell of your breath. It
puffs out in a small hot cloud with each word."
"Pretty bad, huh?"
"res not bad-please, don't stop talking."
But I couldn't think of how to go on.
She said: "Your mouth is like a flower. Each looth is like a daisy
petal, complete with calyx: You're getting a sort of green skin over the
base of your teeth, up neaT the gum."
"Beautiful," I said. "Pretty soon I'll be ready for Bunny to come take
me ,away."
"Hey." Denny rolled over. "Let me see?" leaning on my shoulder.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 727
I said, "Oaf!" and didn't smile.
"Smile,» Denny said.
"I wonder if it comes off. " Lanya reached up and held her hand like
a claw, over my face. "Just a second, n one finger coming down.
"Cut it out-I" I turned my head.
"I was just going to scrape at it with my fingernail."
Denny looked at his and on my shoulder. "Man, my nails are fJ.!thy."
"They're rimmed with the exact color of black pearl." Lanya put
her cheek next to his. "And he'll probably use it in one of his poems."
"Too fancy," I said, my hand on his. She covered mine. Then Denny
his eyes tight and tried to wiggle between us like a basset puppy
(which started us laughing) and sometimes she is a lorikeet. And
sometimes he is a parrot;. and she is an airborne borzoi.
I said: "Get up. I want to show you something," at which Denny
laughed and Lanya grunted.
Denny laid her: "That's all right. We'll just get our clothes off right
away, next time.:n
I said: "AW; come on!»
We put on some clothes (Denny: socks, vest, chains. Lanya: shirt;
her harmonica fell out; was returned to breast pocket; tennis sneakers. Me: pants) climbed down from the loft, put on more clothes
(Denny: pants, boots. Lanya: took off sneakers to put onjeans, put on
sneakers again. Me: vest, chains, boot), and went into the hall.
Baby. Adam,
Devastation, Filament, the Executioner (who everybody
usually calls: X-X)
and Cathedral were
pell-melling in and
X-X told me they
were really beat, had
(To try for accuracy is to risk awkwardness.)
To find out who I am I've had to give up my
name and who knows what part of my life. It
wasn't a choice. But treating it like one seems
the only way to keep my mind ... "seems"? I
am frightened because, in this City, I don't
know where I am, II, don't know where I can go.
(To try for form is to risk pomposity.)
been running since sometime yesterday. I said three or four of them
go up and fall out in the loft bed because we weren't using it.
Filament, the knuckles of one hand on her hip, the other hand waving (she chooses to wear only thin chains, some outside her breasts
[nipples like puddles of Peptobismol on the upper slopes of soapstone
breasts] SOme inside) told about what they done in the park: scared
some children, Unintentionally, and had some sort of loose, blurry
728 Dhalgren
confrontation with two men who might have been Tom and Mak.
Three went to find :mattresses in the back room.
The trapdoor on the porch ceiling was open. Denny climbed up the
ladder nailed aga·inst the wall; Lanya and me (wondering who'd
opened the door and why) followed. Poked my head after her heels
into the lead-colored
Asked Lanya if sh.e'd being a sky. Stepped up on
scorpion of Just a scorpIon s ?Id the ebbly roofing "Not,'" she said sweetly. U on your fuckmg ltfe! P ,
And then: "No, seriously. I've thought about it paper and couldn t
again, and it's just something I don't waRt to do. figure out how tranI like staying here for extended visits. But I like sition had occurred
living with Madame Brown.' Well, she's been between the slab of
here three days straight. And yesterday Denny, tal thr for a joke, put one of his chains around her neck runny me ,ee
and she kept it on tm she went to bed. BIrt she feel beyond the trap,
didn't put it on again this morning when she and the footballwent to school. Stadium-wide, muzzy baUoon around
us-and-the-nearest-buildings. Thought of climbing down and up again
to watch this time.
Across the roof, Fireball-buck naked except his optic girdleturned around and smiled, a little confused.
"Did you open the roof trap?" Lanya asked.
"Yeah. I juS! wanted to get out and walk around.' He lold uS he
liked to go around naked. To his unnecessary explanation, Denny
explained (unnecessarily) lbat you could go around in lbe street
stark naked if you wanted in Bellona " ... and it wouldn't bother nobody." Lanya, by now; was taking oII her clothes. So I took off mine.
Denny said, "What
the ruck," and took
off 00. (He left the
dog's choke collar
looped and re-looped
on his ankle.) Lmya
took her harmonica
out of her srurt and
began to play those
discordant clutches.
We all walked
around and stared
out at the edges of
Filament has a blue scorpion tattooed on her
shoulder she said she got before she came to
Bellona. She has probably volunteered more information about her previous life than anyone
around the nest (most of her life sounds very
dull); but, high on tact, she also manages to reo
main one ofthe most invisible. If one were writ·
ing about the place, she'd probably be among
the half dozen people most likely left out, or
whose one or two outstanding traits you'd fix
for decoration on another character. A girl, and
white, she still has the most typical scorpion
personality, almost unbelievably so. In fact, I
wonder if I believe that; so this note.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 729
what we could see or each other when each other wasn't staring back;
leaned on the roof rim; sat on the mansard things along the side. A
long time.
Then Fireball got on his pants and chains-
"So long," Lanya said.
Fireball grinned. "So long."
-and went down.
'We came closer together at the far corner and talked about him a
while, me and Lanya mosdy, mostly Denny listening. Then I told them
for the first time about mugging that guy last week.
Sort of awed, Denny said: "WOW!II
Lanya said: "You are kidding, aren't you ... ? Jesus, you're not!"
She was Sitting cross.legged with her back on the low wall. When she
lifted her harmonica, there were two parallel dashes on her thigh.
"No, I'm not kidding. It was interesting."
"The awful thing is, I'm sure you did it to find out what it felt like,
or for some other half-assedly commendable reason."
"The main thing," I explained, "isn't that I was so scared, but if you
get off this very thin line, you get angrier than a motherfucker-"
"Look," she said, "you wouldn't kiIi somebody just to find out what
it felt like."
"It would be easier here than any place else."
"Christ!" She looked up at the sky.
"Okay," I said. "So you don't approve. Why are you angry?"
"Because, n and her ,eyes (:ame down to mine, "in some funny way
I think it's my fault. And don't ask me to explain that; or you'll get
angry."
While I tried to figure out some way to get her to explain, practical Denny asked: "What'd you get?"
"Three bucks. For the work, it pays better than the Richards's." I
reached over for my pants, took the bills out of my pocket, and gave
them to him. "Here.' I glanced at Lanya with a little smile. "I'd split
it between you, but she won't take one."
She got a tightish expression that let me know she certainly would.
Denny looked at the biHs and repeated: "Wow!· Thinking: He
would use the same inflection if he discovered something had been
stolen from him. "Here." Denny handed one bill to Lanya and-
"Here, you keep one. That way we can split it up right"-one back
to me. "I gotta take a piss." He stood and walked away, palms facing
back, the bill wrapped on the middle finger of his left hand.
730 Dhalgren
Lanya watched me. "I suppose I'd find you dull if you dido't keep
dropping stUff like that into my head. No, don't say anything. I'm still
thinking.» She pushed herself to her koees. "I've got to take a piss
too.» Her buttocks and one thigh were printed from the roofing paper.
At the corner drain, Denny looked back over his shoulder. "You
going downstairs to the bathroom?'
"No,' she said in a considered tone that, when the rest of their exchange was finished, should have made me realize she knew what it
was going to be.
DOh, yeah. I goess you can squat here," Denny finished and shook
himself,
"What makes you think I have to squat to piss?"
"You're a girl. You can't do it st ... I mean I thought girls had to sit
down or something."
"Jesus God!" Lanya said.
·Well, how do you goide it then?" Denny asked.
"Same way you do,»
"Bul you don't have a-?"
She held up two fingers in a peace sign, turned them down against
her cunt and sort of pulled, "Like that, if you must koow. Now would
you please stop staring and let me pee?"
"Oh ... yeah." Denny frowned. "Sometimes I ,can't piss ina john
if samebady's staring right at my dick," He turned away, glanced back,
away again. ·Wow.»
Like something had been given back to him,
He went to the wall "Now I neVer koew that," he said.
When she came up, he was looking at the harmonica; turned and
handed it to her across my shoulder.
"You koow how to play it?" she asked.
"Naw.'"
"The scale starts here," she said. "See, at the fourth hole,"
We went down (putting on clothes half here, half thete), and in the
living room got into the discussion with some of the people men·
tioned (Fireball, Filament, et al) that I wanted to Write down some of
the ,things Lanya said in it in the flIst place. (When I started this, I'd
thought that the business about Lanya being turned on by all those
funny things about me, and what had happened on the roof would
make a good prologoe, because in the discussion she referred to them)
but again I'm tired Qf writing it down, now that I've gotten to the substance.
The Anathemata: a plagoe journal 731
It had to do with the differences (and similarities) between the girls
who were scorpions and the girls who just hung around with us. With
One of the things that also went down in the
discussion was an argument about getting
food, which I guess was really what started the
whole and this other part just came up;
but my mind follows funny tracks.
reference to the guys
who were members
and the guys who
just hung. It was a
good discussion to
have and a dull one
to reconstruct. And I goess it was mainly for Mike's benefit anyway
(Mike is one of said guys who hangs, a long-haired ftiend of Devasta.
tion's; sleeps here most of the tiroe but also doesn't want to join) and
I goessfthinklsuspect One difference between members and non.mem·
bers anyway is that members know the difference already and don't
have to talk about them (that politeness again) though from some of
the things Tarzan says, I wonder,
an intercallory jamb between Wednesday and
the twenty-second, bless. Grain, blabbed on
slip·time, told its troubles to the tree (all runny
in the oozy gyre's incarnadine). She won't run
Thursdays. The underside of the little hand is
tarnished; why is canonized so
easy? Truck-tracks crow-foot creators drooling
half·and half. She didn't remember how or
when, last time. Pavement sausages split; the
cabbage remembers. Lions with prehensile
eyes pick up their paws, apocopate, and go to
Get with·it, mauve·peanutl Make it,
thlng·a.ma·boob! You won't catch me slipping
my sticktoitiveness under your smorgasborg.
Fondle my nodule, love my dog, Lilting is all is
easy. Knitting needles receed around the vision, baring his curviture, dearing her underwear, So that's not what it's for. French fried
pickelilly and deep·dish·apple death won't get
you through that wake up in the morning alive.
Your rosamundus may mathematik him' but it
, ' won t moVe me one mechanical apple corer. I
have come to to wound the autumnal city: the
other side of the question is a mixed metaphor
if I ever heard one. Timed methods run out:
coo, morning bird. I could stop before breath·
ing marble basonets. Salvage a disjuncture, it's
all you Middle of the ring around the Harley
works them?" I asked.
But Faust was
walking ahead be·
tween the shadowed
presses. uHere, n he
said. "This is what
you want to see,
isn't it?"
1 stepped up to
the work table.
Battleship linoleum
glittered with lead
shavings.
"There,' Hepainted at a full.page tray
of type with a yellow
index nail.
R.aised grey·ongrey proclaimed:
0J,10:J323HT ,VlQ02
VlOITJ3JJOJ
=10 ftOHTUA 3HT MOJl=i1
2CIH;)flO 22AHB
"But ... 1"
732 Dha!gren
Davidson bush, blooming, blooming, shame,
socks, dearth and passion pudding, flowers,
Ms Crystaline Pristine. Her backwoods
fication is citified in the face. Pentacle p,e and
hunger city, oh my oh too much, my meat and
mashed potatoes pansy, my in the middle of it
biche,
Hart's blood is good fly-catchin g bait. So's
fresh sheep-shit. Blatting about in the empty aurical you think Atocha is in Madrid, what about
92nd Street, or what she told me of St. Croix?
She isn't your running the mill broad
sword or side. She's right on the guache Circuit
where' a principle's a principle with all hell lined
up to get paid. Maundy, Tributary, Whitstanley,
Horripilation, Factotum, Susquahana, Summerfine-day. It's all' the same In the bitch's kitchen.
You look for the dice this time. Maybe you can
wind up a winner. Summary, Mopery, Trtular, \!\(isdam, Thaumaturgy, Samoa and five
hands oVer. When I grow up I'm going to get a
vasectomy all my own. (A dendrite in the glans is
worthy of the bush.) Why does he insist on winter all the time? You can stutter in the water but
that's not the way to think. Not thin
king but the
way thinking feels. Not knowledge but knowledge's form. If there's enough raisins,.splayfeet,
and guilded hornet-heads, you can
WIsh, dream,
lie like a Saxon though you only prevaricate like
a Virginia ham. George! the Ingenuity 'I've expended to fill five missing days.
Conversation with furry Forest at Teddy's:
"What are you writing now?"
"I'm not writing anything,lr I: said. "I haven't
been writing anything and [;1m not going to
write anything."
He frowned, and I hoped a lot the lie had at
least the structure of truth. But how can 'it7
Which is why I haven't been able to write anything but this journal in sO long'. And thank the
blinded stars, I feel the energies for that going.
What other days from my life have gone?
I'That's you, ain't
it?" His cackle
echoed among the
ceiling pipes.
"But I haven't
given Calkins the
second collection!
He doesn't even
know there is one!"
"Maybe he's just
making a good
guess.'"
"But I don't want
himto-ft
"They're supposed to got obituaries too, prepared
on all the famous
people around here
who might die."
"Oh, come an,n I
said.. "Let's get out
of here."
"YO" keep askin'
me to show you
where they printed
the thing .. ."
1 started away
from the desk. "But I
don't see any rolls of
paper around. The
presses aren't going.
You mean a thirtysix-page newspaper
comes out of here
After a week, everyday?" I can't remember five. After a
year, how many days in it will you never think of
again?
But Faust was already walking away,
still chuckling, his
while hair-sides, beard. aDd back-covering the bright choker.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 733
"Joaquim?" I called. "Joaquim, when do they actually print it? I
mean this doesn't look like anybody's been in here since before the
going out along Broadway. The smoke was as bad as I've ever seen itrolling from Side-alleys, gauzing the streets in loose layers. Down one
block, the face on an eight-(I counted)-story building was curtained
with it, leaking out broken windows, to waterfall to the street, mounded and shifting.
One section of pavement had been replaced by metal plates (some
incomplete repair) clanging when I crossed. After another half hour
the buildings were taller and the street was wider and the sky grey and
streaked like weathered canvas, loke silvered velvet.
On the wide steps to a black and glass office building was a fountain. I went up to examine: Wet patches ·of color on the dusty mosaic
at the bottom; rust around the pentangle of nozzles on the cement
ball; I climbed over the lip to look in what I guessed had held plants:
dried stem stumps poked from ashy earth; beer and soda-can tabs. I
stepped once on a wet patch of green and yellow mosaic tiles with my
bare foot; took my foot away and left a cha.lky print.
The bus came around the corner. It didn't scare me this time. 1
vaulted the fountain edge and sprinted down the steps.
The doors flapclapped open even
before it stopped.
"Hey," I called.
"How far "p Broadway do you go?"
Do you know the
He feels the experience whose detritus is interleaved in the Orchids' pages/petals has left
him a perfect voice with which he can say nothing; he can imagine nothing duller. (For that
sentence to make sense, it must be ugly as possible. And it isn't-quite. So it fails.)
expression on somebody's face when you wake them out of a sound
sleep with something serious, like a fire or a death? (Small, bald, oyster.eyed black man, obsessed and trundling his bus from here to
there.) "How far you going?"
I told him: "Pretty far."
Whule he considered how far that was, I got on. Then we both
thought about the last time I was On his bus; I don't know if the little
movement of his head back into the khaki collar acknowledged that
or not. But I'm sure that's what we were thinking. I also thought: There
are no other passengers. '
He closed the doors.
734 Dhalgrrn
I sat behind him, looking at the broad front window as we shook
on up the street.
A sound made me look back.
All the advertising cards had been filled with posters, or sections
from posters, of George. From over the window his looked down
there; here were his knees. The long one over the back door showed
his left leg, hOrizontal, foot to mid-thigh. A third of them were crotchshots.
The sound again; so I got up and handed myself down the aisle, bar
after bar. The old man_pretending to sleep-was so slumped in the
back seat I couldn't see him till I passed the second door. One brawn
and ivory eye opened over his frayed collar slanting across the black
wrinkle of an ear. He closed it again, turned away, and made that strangling moan-the sound, again, that till now I had suspected was something strained and complaining in the engine.
1 sat, bare foot on the warm wheel case, baot on the bar below the
seat in front. The smoke against the glass was fluid thick; runnels
wormed the pane. Thinking (complicated thoughts): Life is smoke;
the clear lines through it, encroached on and obliterated by it, are
poems, crimes, orgasms-carried this analogy to every jounce and
jump of the bus, ripple on the glass, even noticing that through the
windows aCross the aisle I could see a few buildings.
The falsification of this journal: First off, it
doesn,'! reflect my daily life. Most of what happens hour by 'hour here is q,uiet and dull. ":'e
sit most ,of the time, watch, the dull sky shpping. 'Frankly, that is too stupid to write about.
When something really involving, violent, or
important happens, it occupies too much of
my time, my physical energy. and my thought
for me to be able to write about. I can think of
four things that have happened in the nest I
would like to have described when they occurred, but they so completed themselves in
the happening that even to refer to them
seems superfluous.
What is dQwn, then, is a chronicle of incidents with a potential for wholeness they did
not have when they occurred; a false picture,
again, bec.ause they show neither the
spread of our life's fabric, nor the most Slgmficant pattern points.
The bus stopped.
The driver twisted
around; for a moment I thought he
was speaking to the
old man behind me:
"1 can't take you
no farther," gripping
the bar across the
back of the driver's
seat, elbow awkward in the air. "I
got you past the
store.:D He pauses
Significantly; I wish
he hadn't. ·You'll be
all right."
Behind me the
The Anathemata: a plague journal 735
To show the one is too boring and the other
too difficult. That is probably why <as I use up
more and more paper trying to return the
ing I had when I thought I was writing poems) I
am not a poet ... anymore? The poems
haps hint it to someone else, but for me they
are dry as the last leaves dropping from the
burned trees on Brisbane. T'hey are moments
when I had the intensity to see, and the energy
to build, some careful analog that co
mpleted
the seeing.
They stuck at me for two weeks? For three?
I don't really know if they occurred. lhat
would take another such burst. An I have been
left is the exhausting habit of trying to tack up
the slack in my life with words.
the bus turn.
old man sniffled and
shifted.
I stood up and,
under Georges eyes
(and knees and hands
and left foot and right
tit), stepped on the
treadle. The doors
opened. I got out on
the curb.
The pavement
was shattered about a
hydrant, which leaned from its pipes. 1
turned and watched
From the doorway at the end of the block a man stepped. Or a
woman. Whoever it was, anyway, was naked. 1 think.
I walked in that direction. The figure went back in. What I passed
was a florist's smashed display window. At first I was surprised at all
the greenery on the little shelves up the side. But ,they were plasticferns, .leaves, shrubs. Three big pots in the center only had stumps.
Back, In the shadow, by the aluminum frame on the glass door of the
refrigerator, something big, fetid, and wet moved. I only saw it a second when I hurried by. But I got goose bumps.
The reason the bus driver hadn't wanted to go on was that Broadway grew ornate scrolled railings on either side and soared over train
tracks forty feet down a brick-walled canyon. A few yards out, a twelve
foot hunk of paving had fallen off, as though a gap-tooth giant had
bitten it away. The railing twisted offboth sides of the gash. From the
edge, looking down, I couldn't see where any rubble had landed.
Beyond the overpass, to the left, a rusted wire fence ran before
some trees; through the trees, I saw water patched with ash. To the
right, up a slope blotched with grass, was the monastery.
Like that.
I walked up the steps between the beige stones. Halfway, I looked
back across the road.
Smoke reeds grew from the woods and clotted waters to bloom and
blend with the sky.
I reached the top of the steps with the strangest sense of relief and
736 Dhalgren
anticipation. The simple journey was the resolve that till now I'd
thought suspended. The monastery was several three-story buildings.
A tower rOse behind the biggest. I put my hands in my pockets, feelingmy ieg muscles move as I walked; one finger went through a hole.
Thinking: You arrive at a monastery halfway through a round of
. pocket-po a\. Sure. I relaxed roy stomach (it had tightened in the
climb) and ambled, breathing loudly, Oyer the red and grey flags. Between dusty panes, putty blobbed the leaded tessellations. At the same
moment I decided the place was deserted, a man in a hood and robe
stepped around the corner and peered.
I took my hands out of my pockets.
He folded his oyer his lap and came forward. They were big, and
translucent. The white-and-black toes of very old basketball sneakers
poked alternately from his hem. His eyes Were grey. His smile looked
like the .amphetamine freeze on a particularly pale airline stewardess.
His bood waS back enough to see his skull was white as bread dough.
A sore, mostly hidden, like an eccentric map, was visible under the
hood's edge: wet, raiSed, with purple bits crusted inside it and yellow
flaking around it. "Yes," he asked. "Can I help you?"
1 smiled and shrugged.
"I saw you coming up the steps and I was wondering if there was
anything I could do for you, anyone in particular you wanted to see?"
"I was just looking around."
"Most of the grounds are in the back. We don't reaUy ene01.1rage
people to just wander about, unless they're staying, Frankly, they're
not in such hot shape right through here. The Father was talking yes·
terdayat the morning meal about starting a project to put them back
in order. Everybody was delighted to get a place right across from Holland u.ke-" He nodded toward the other side of the road. "But noW
lookatit. "
. When 1 turned back from ,the lacustrine decay; he was pulling his
hood further down his forehead with thick thumb and waxy forefinger.
1 looked around at the builclings. I'd been trying to fmd this place
so long; but once found, the search seemed so easy. 1 was alf on some
trip about-
"Excuse me,:n he said.
-and came back.
"Are you the Kid?"
The Anathemata: a plague journal 737
I felt a good feeling in my stomach and a strong urge to say No.
"Yeah."
His chin and hiS smile twisted in a giggle without sound. "1 thought
you might be. I don't know why I thought so, but it seemed a reaSOnable guess. 1 mean I've seen pictures of ... scorpions-in the Times.
So 1 knew you were one ofthem, but I had no way of knOwing which
one. That you were the . .. " and shook his head, a satisfied man.
"Well." He folded his hands. "We've never been visited by any scorpions before, so I just took a guess." His wrinkleless face wrinkled.
"Are you sure you weren't looking for someone?"
"Who:S here to look fod"
"Most people who come usually want to see the Father-but he's
closeted with Mr Calkins now, so that would be unfeasible todayunless of course you wanted to wait, or come back at some other-"
"Is Mr Calkins here?" In my head I'd been halfway through an
imaginary dialogue which had begun when I'd answered hiS first question with: The Kid? Who, me? Naw ...
"Could I see him?" I asked.
"Well, 1 don't ... as 1 said, hes closeted with the Father."
"He'd want to see me, U I said. "He's a friend of min.e. H
"I don't know if I ought to disturb them." His smile fixed Some
emotion I couldn't understand till he spoke: "And I believe one of the
reasons Mr Calkins came here was to put some of his friends at a more
comfortable distance." Then he giggled. Out loud.
"Hes never met me," I said and wondered why. (To explain that the
personal reasons which make you want to put friends at a distance
hadnotbing to do with Calkins and me? But thats not what it sounded like.) I1et it go.
A ben bonged.
"Oh, I guess-" he glanced at the tower- "SiSter Ellen and Broth.
er Paul didn't forget after all,· and smiled (at some personal joke?)
while 1 watched a model of the monastery I did,,'t even realize I'd
made-the three buildings inhabited solely by the Father, Calkins, and
this one here-break down and reassemble into: a community of
brothers and sisters, a small garden, goats and chickens, matins, complines, vespers ...
"Heft n I said.
He looked at me.
738 Dhalgren
"You go tell MrCalkins the Kid is here, and find out if he wants to
see me. If he doesn't, I'll come back some other time-now that I
know where this place is."
He considered, unhappily. "WeD, an right." He turned.
"Hey."
He looked back.
"WhQ are-you?"
"Randy ... eh, Brother Randolf."
"Okay."
He went off around the corner, with the echo of the bell.
Beneath the chipped keystone the arched door looked as though (a
slough of rUSt below the wrist-thick bolt) it hadn't been opened all
year.
And I got back on my trip: I had looked so long for this place; finding it had been accomplished with no care for the goal itself. For minutes 1 wondered if I couldn't get everything in my life like that. When
I finally worked out a sane answer C"No."), 1 laughed (alo"d) and felt
better.
"They're all-"
I turned from the miasmas of Holland Lake.
"-all fmished for the afternoon, • Brother Randy said from the corner. "He'n talk with you. Mr Calkins said he'll talk with yo" a little
while. The Father says it's all right." (1 started toward him and he still
said;) "You j"st come with me." 1 think he was surprised it had worked
out like that. 1 was surprised too; but he was unhappy about it.
"Here." was a white wood lawn chair on a stone porch with
columns, along the side of the building.
I sat and gave him a grin.
"They're finished, you see." he offered. "For the afternoon. And the
Father says it's all right for him to talk now, if it isn't for taO long."
1 think he wanted to smile.
I wonder if that thing up under his hood hurt.
"Thanks," I said.
He left.
I looked around the patchy grass, up and down the porch, at the
beige stone; inset beside me in the wall was a concrete grill, cast in
floral curls. Once I stood up and looked through it close. Another grill
behind it was set six inches out of alignment, so you couldn't see inside, I was thinking it was probably for ventilation, when my knee (as
The Anathemata: a plague journal 739
I moved across the stone flowers trying to see) hit the chair and the
feet scraped, loudly.
"Excuse me ... ?"
I pulled back a few inches. "Hello?" I said, surprised.
"I didn't realize you were out there yet-until I heard you move."
"Oh. " I stepped back from the grill. "I thought you were going to
come out here on the porch ... ' (He chuckled.) "Well, I guess this is
okay." I p"lled my chair around.
"Good. I'm glad you fmd this acceptable. It's rather unusual for the
Father to allow someone seeking an understanding of the monastic
community-3S they describe the process here-to have any intercollI'Se
at 0\1 with people outside the walls. Converse with members is limited.
But though I've been here several days, I don't officially start my cOllI'Se
of study till sundown this evening. So he's made an exception."
I Sat On the arm of the lawn chair, "Well," I said, "if it goes down
this evening . .. "
He ,chuckled again. "Yes. I suppose so."
"What are you doing here?" I asked.
"I guess the best way to describe it is to say thatI'm about to embark on a spiritual course of study. I'm not too sure how long it will
last. You catch me just in time. Oh-I must warn you: You may ask
some questions that I'm not allowed to answer. I've been instructed
by the Father that, when asked them, I am simply to remain silent
until you speak again."
"Don't worry." I said, "I won't pry into any secrets abut your devotional games here," wishing I sort of could.
But the voice said; "No, not questions that have anything to do with
the monastery."
And (While he considered further explanation?) I considered the
tower ,exploding slowly. thrusting masonry on blurred air too thin to
1I0at brick and bolts and bellrope.
"I don't think there's anything about the monastery you could ask I
wouldn't be allowed to answer-if I know the answers. But part of the
lrlIining is a sort of self-discipline: Any questions that sparks certain internal reactions in me, causes me to think certain thoughts, to feel cer.
tain feelings, rather than :rush into some verbal response that, informative or nOt, is still put up mainly to repress ,those thoughts and feelings,
I'm supposed to experience them {ully in the anxiety of silence."
"Oh." I said, "What SOIt of thoughts and feelings?" Atter ten quiet
740 Dhalgren
seconds, llaugbed. "I'm sorry; 1 guess that's sort of like not thinking
about the white bippopotamus wben you're cbanging the boiling
water into gold."
"Rather."
"It sounds interesting. Maybe I'll try it some day," and felt almost
like I did tbe morning I'd told Reverend Amy I'd drop in on one ·of ber
services. "Hey, thanks for the note. Thanks for tbe party; too."
"You're most welcome. If you got my letter, tben 1 must restrain
from apologizing any more. Tbougb I'm nor surprised at meeting you,
I wasn't exactly expecting it now. Dare I ask if you enjoyed youISelftbougb perbaps it's best just to let it lie."
"It was educational. But I don't think it had toO much to do witb
your not sbowing up. All the scorpions bad a good time-l brougbt
tbe wbole nest."
"r sbould like to bave been tbere!"
"Everybody got drunk. "Tbe only people who didn't enjoy tbemselves probably didn't deserve to. IJidn't you get any repor,ts back from
your friends?" First I thought I'd asked one of tbose questions.
" ... Yes ..• Yes, 1 did. And some of my friends are colorful gossips-sometimes I wonder if tbat's not bow I cbose I
trust nothing occurred to distract you from any writing you're engaged
in at present. I was quite sincere about everything 1 said concerning
your next collection in my letter."
"Yeah."
"After some of my friends-my spies-fmisbed their account of the
evening, Tbelma-do you remember ber?--said practiCally tbe same
thing you just did, almost word for word, about anyone who didn't
enjoy himself not deserving to. Wben she said it, I suspected sbe was
just trying to make me feel better for my absence. But here it is, corroborated by the guest of bonor. I best not question it furtber. I hadn't
realized you were a friend ·of umya's."
"That's rigbt," I said. "Sbe used to know you."
• An impressive young lady, both tben and, apparently, from report,
noW. As I was saying, after my spies finished tbeir account, r decided
that you are even more the sort of poet Bellona needs tban I'd tbought
before, in every way-except in literary quality wbicb, as 1 explained
in my letter, I am, and intend to remain, unfit to judge."
"Tbe nicest way to put it, Mr Calkins," I said, "is I'm just not interested in tbe ways you mean. I never was interested in tbem. I think
tbey're a load of sbit anyway. But ... "
The Anathemata: a plague journal 741
"You are aware," he said after my embarrassed silence, "the fact that
you feel that way makes you tbat much more suited for your role in
just tbe ways I mean. Every time you refuse another interview to the
Times, we shaH report it, as an inspiring example of your disinterest
in publicity, in tbe Times. Thus your image will be furtber propagated-Of course you haven't refused any, up till now. And you said
'But .. ,11'1 Calkins paused.. 1''But' what?fI
I felt really uncomfortable on tbe chair arm. "But ... I feel like I
may be lying again." I looked down at tbe creases of my belly, crossed
with chain.
If he picked upon tbe "again" be didn'tsbow it. "Can you tell me
hOW?fI
"I remember ... I remember a morning in the park, before I ever
met Mr Newboy, or eVen knew anyone would ever want to publish
anything I ever wrote, sitting under a tree-bare-ass, with Lanya
asleep beside me, and I was writing-no, I was re-copying out something. Suddenly I was struck with ... delusions of grandeur? The fantasies. were so intense I couldn't breathe! They burt my stomach. 1
couldn't ... write! Which was the point. Those fantasies were all in
tbe terms you're talking about. So 1 know I have tbem ... ' 1 tried to
figure why I'd stopped. When I did, I took a deep breath: "I don't thlok
I'm a poet .•. any more, Mr Calkins. I'm not sure if I ever was one.
For a couple of weeks, once, I migbt have come close. If I actually was,
I'll never know. No one ever can. But one of the things I've lost as well,
if I ever had it, is the clear knowledge of tbe pitch tbe vanes of my soul
could twist to. 1 don't know ... I'm just assuming you're interested in
this because in your
letter you mentioned wanting another book." The advantage of transcribing your own con- versation: .It's the only chance you have to be ar- ticulate. this conversation must have been five times as long and ten times as dumsy. ·Two
phrases I really did lift, however, are the ones
about u • •• the clear knowledge of the pitch the
vanes of my soul could twist to ... n and " . .. experience them in the anxiety of silence ... n
Only it occurs to me " ... the vanes of my
soul ... " was his, while 11', •• the anxiety of silence ... " was mine.
liMy interest," he
said, coldly, "is politics. I'm only out to
examine tbat tiny
place wbere it and
art are flusb. You
ma,ke the writer's
very common mistake: You assume publishing is the only political activity there is. It's One of my more interesting ones; irs also one of my
smalles!.lt surf.,IS accoIdingly, and tbere's nothing either of us can do
74-2 Dhalgren
about it with Bellona in the shape it is. Then again, perhaps I make a
common mistake for a politician. I tend to see all your problems mere·
Iy as a matter of a little Dichtung, a little Warheit, with the emphasis
On the latter." He paused and I pondered. He came up with something
first: "YOli say you're BOt interested in the exlIa·literary surroundings
of your work-l take it we both refer to acclaim, prestige, the attendant hero·worship and its inevitable distortions-all those things, in
effect, that buttress the audienceS pleasure in the artist when the work
itself is wanting. Then you tell me that, actually; you're no longer mterested in the work itself-how else am I to interpret such a slatement as 'I am nO longer a poet'? TeU me-and 1 ask because 1 am a
politician and I really don't know-can an artist be lIuly interested in
his art and nOt in those other things? A politician-and this I'll
swear-can not be truly (better say; effectively) interested in his community's welfaIe without at least wanting (whether he gets it or not)
his community's acclaim. Show me: one: who doesn't wanl it (whether
h. gets it or not) and I'll show you someone out to kill the Jews for
their own good or off to conquer Jerusalem and have it dug up as a
reservoir Cor holy water .•
"Artists can," I said. "Some very good emperors have been the patrons of some very good poets. But a lot more good poets seem to have
gotten by without pallonage from any emperors at all, good, bad, or
otherwise. Okay: a poet is interested in all those things, acclaim, reputation, image. BUI as they're a part oflife. He's got to be a person who
knows what he's doing in a very profound way. Interest in how they
work is one thing. Wanting them is another thing-the sort of thing
that will mess up any real understanding of how they work. Yes,
they're interesting. But I don't want them.'
"Are you lying?-'again,' as you put it. Are you fudging?-which
is how I'd put it."
"l'm fudging," 1 said. "But then •.. I'm also writing."
.You are? What a surprise afler all thatl Now I've certainly read
enough dreadful things by meR and womeD who once wrote a work
worth reading to know that the habit of putting words on paper must
be tenaciolls as the devil-But you're making it very difficult for me
to maintain my promised objeCtivity. You must have realized, if only
from my euphuistic journalese, I harbor aU sorts ofliterary theoriesa failing I share. with Caesar, Charlemagne, and Winston Ohurchill
(not to meRtion Nero and Henry the Eighth): Now 1 want to read your
poems from sheer desire to help! But that's just the point where poli.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 743
tics, haVing convinced itself its motives are purely benevolent, should
keep its hands olI, off, alI! Why are you dissatisfied?"
I shrugged, realized be couldn't see it, and wondered bow much of
him l was lOSing behind the stonework. "What I write," I said, "doesn't
seem to be ... true. I mean 1 can model so little of what its about. Life
is a very terrible thing, mostly, with points of wonder and beauty. Most
of what makes it terrible, though, is simply that there's so much of it,
blaring in through the five senses. In my loft, alone, in the middle of
the night, it comes blaring in. So I work at culling enough from it to
construct moments of order." I meshed my fingers, which were cool,
and locked them across my stomacb, whicb was hot. "1 haven't been
given eaough tools. I'm a crazy man. I haven't been given enough life.
I'm a crazy man in this crazed city. When the problem is anything as
complicated as one word spoken between two people, both suspecting they understand it ... When you touch your own stomach with
your own hand and try to determine who is feeling who ... When
three people put their hands over my knee, each breathing at a differ·
ent rate, the heartbeat in the heel of the thumb of one of taem jarring
with tae pulse in (be artery edging the bony cap, and one of them is
me-what in me can order gets exaausted before it all."
'You're sure you're not Simply telling me-Oh, I wisb I could see
youl-or avoiding telling me, that the responsibilities of beiDg a big,
bad scorpion are getting in the way of your work?"
"No," 1 said. "More likely the opposite. In the nest, I've finally got
enougb people to keep me warm at nigbt. And 1 can feel safe as anyOne in the city. Any scorpions who think about my writing at all are
Simply dazzled by the object-the book you were nice enough to have
it made into. A few of them even blush when descriptions of them
show up ill it. That leaves what actually goes on between the first line
aRd the last entirely to me. The scorpions caught me without a fight.
My mind is a magnet and they're filings iD a field I've made-No,
they're the magnets. I'm the filing, in a stable position now. n
"You're too content to write?"
I said, "are a politician; and you're just not going to understand.'"
"At least you're giving me a little more support in my resolve not
to read your work. Well, you say you're still writing. Regardless of any
personal preface you might make, even this one, I'm just as interest>-
ed in your second book as 1 was in your first."
"I don't kRow if I'm about to waste any time trying to get it to you."
744 Dhalgren
"If I must arrange to have it hijacked, ink still moist, from beneath
the very shadow of your dark quill, I suppose that's what I'll have to
do. Let's see, shall we?"
"I've got other things to do.» For the first time, I was really angry
at his alIectation.
"Tell me about them," he said, in a voice so natural, but follOwing
so naturally from the archness, my anger was defeated.
"I ... I want you to tell me something," I said.
"If I can."
"Is the Father, here at the monastery;" I asked, "a good man?"
"Yes. He's a very good man."
"But for me to accept that, you see," I said, "I have to know I can
accept your definition of good. It probably isn't the same as mine ...
I don't even know if I have one!'
"Again, I wish I were allowed to see you. Your voice sounds as
though you might be upset about something." (Which I hadn't realized;
I didn't feel upset.) "I'm not oblivious to your elIorts to keep our talk at
a level of honesty I might find tedious if I didn't have the respect for
truth a man forced to tell a great many lies for the most commendable
reasons must. I'm not very satisfied with myself, Kid. In the past
months, a dozen separate situations have propelled me to the Single realization that, to be a good governor, if it is not absolutely necessary to
be a good man, it is certainly of inestimable help. Bellona is an eccentric city that fOSters eccentric ways. But the reason I'm here, of all eccentric places in this most eccentric place, is because I really want to-n
Dust or something blew into my mouth, got down my throat; I
cleared it, thinking: Christ, I hope he doesn't decide my voice is breaking with emotion!
"-to remedy a little of that dissatisfaction. If he is not a good man,
the Father is certainly ",generous one. He is allowing me to Stay here
... Of course there's always an odd relation between the head of the
state and the head of the state-approved religion. After all, I helped
set up this place. Same way I helped set up Teddy!;. Of course in this
the biggest-if easiest-job, given my position with the Times,
was making sure there was no publicity. In your present mood, you
can probably appreciate that. But, no, my relatioR to the Father is not
that of commoner to priest. On my side, at any rate, it is dupliCitous,
fraught with doubt. If I didn't doubt, I wouldn't be here nOw. I'm afraid
the politiCS works through the spiritual like rot. The good governor
at least wants it to be the best rot possible."
The Anathemata: a plague journal 745
"Is the Father a good man?" I asked again and tried not to sound
at all like I was upset. (Maybe that backfired?)
"Has it occurred to you, my young Diogenes, that if you polished
up the chimney of your own lamp, you'd be a little more likely to find
this mysterious and miraculous Other you are searching out? Why
does it concern you so? n
"So I can live here," I saidt "in Bellona."
"You're afraid that for want of one good man the city shall be struck
down? You better look back across the train-tracks, boy. Apocalypse
has come and gone. We're JUSt grubbing in the ashes. That Simply isn't
our problem any more. If you wanted out, you should have thought
about it a long time back. Oh, you're very high-minded-and so, at
times, am 1. Well, as the head of the state religion, the Father does a
pretty good job; good enough so that those doing not quite so well
would do a bit better not to question-especially if that's all we can
get."
"What do you thiok about the religion of the people?" I asked.
"How do you mean?»
"You know. Reverend Amy's church; George; June; that whole
business."
"Does anyone take that seriously?"
"For a governor,» I said, "you're pretty out of touch with what the
people are into, aren't you? You've seen lhe things that have shown
up in this sky. There're posters of him all over town. You published
the interview, and the pictures that made them gods."
"I've seen some of it, .of course. But I'm afraid all that black mysticism and homoeroticism is just nOt somethiog I personally fiod very
attractive. And it certainly doesn't strike me as a particularly savory
basis for worship. Is Reverend Taylor a good woman? Is George a good
... god?"
"I'm nol that interested in anybody's religion," I told him. "But if
you want to bring the purpose of the church down totuming out people who do good things: When I was awfully hungry, she red me. But
when I was hUrl and thirsty, Someone at your gate told me I couldn'l
get a glass of water."
"Yes. That regrettable incident was reported to me. Thiogs do catch
up to you here, don't they? When you were unpublished, however, I
published you."
"All right. n My laugh was too sharp. "You've gOt the whole thing
down, Mr Calkins. Sure, it's your city. Hey, you remember the article
746 Dhalgren
about me saving the kids from the fire the night of the party? Well, it
wasn't me. It was George. I was just along. But he was down there,
searching through the fire, seeing if anybody needed help. I just wandered by; and the only reason I stayed was because he told me the ones
who'd started out with him from Teddy's had gotten too chickenshit and
run. 1 heard the kids crying first, but George was the one who busted
into the building and got the five of ,them out alive. Then, when your
reporter got to him later, George made Ollt like it was all me, because
he didn't want the acclaim, prestige, and attendant hero-worship.
Which, in the mood I am now, I approve of. Now is George a bad man?"
"I believe-" the voice was dry- "implicit in what you originally
asked was that so necessary distinction between those who do good
and who are good. n
"Sure: I said. "But ""Plicit in what you said was that bit about
making do with what you can get. I can get George if I need him. He's
genial enough for a god, w.ith some nicely hllman failings like a history oHust."
"I think I'm stilljudeo-Christian enough to be uncomfortable with
expressly human demiurges."
"In the state approved religion, the governor is God's appointed
representative on earth, if I remember right. Isn't that, when all is said
and done. what makes the relation between the head of the state and
the head of the church as ticklish as you were just telling me it is?
You're as much a god as George, minus some celestial portents andof course, I'm just guessing-a couple of inches on your dick."
"I suppose one valid purpose of poets is to bring blasphemy to the
steps of the altar. I just wish you hadn't felt obliged to do it today.
Nevertheless,l appreciate it as a political, if not a religiOUS, necessity."
"Mr Calkins," I said, "most of your sllbjects aren't sure whether or
not this place even exists. I'm not presenting any long considered
protest. I wasn'tsllre ,there was a Father till today. I was just asking-"
"What are you asking, young man?"
What I'd intended to come back with got cut away by my realization ·of his real distress. ·Um ... " I tried to think of something clever
and couldn't. " ... is the Father a good man?"
When he didn't answer, and I began to suspectlrecal1 why, I wanted to laugh. Determined to go in silence, I got off the arm ·of the chair.
Three steps, thOllgh, and my blubbering broke into a full throated giggle that threatened toreenlS. If Calkins could have seen, I would have
flashed my lights.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 7'/7
Brother Randy, robes blOwing about his sneakers, stepped around
the corner. "You're going?" He still wore his methadrine grimace.
"Um-hm."
He turned to walk with me. The breeze that had been dull in my
left ear now grew firm enough to beat my vest about my sides; it
tugged Randy:' hood off. I looked at the lone Australia on the South
Pacific of his skull. It wasn't nearly as big as I'd imagined from the
edge. He saW me looking; so I asked: "Does that hurt?"
·Sometimes. I think the dust and junk in the air irritate it. It's a lot
better now than it used to be. Before, it was all down over my ear and
the back of my neck-when I first got here. The Father suggested I
shave my head; that's certainly given it a chance to heal." We reached
the steps. "The Father knows an awful lot about medicine. He's made
me put some stuff on it and it seems to be clearing up. I thought for a
while he might have been a doctor Or something, once, but I asked
him .. ,n
In the pause I nodded and started down. I'd swear he was on something, and the mOment he'd started talking I'd gotten auditory visions
of the endless rap.
" ... and he said he wasn't.
·So long.· He waved his big, translucent hand.
All the way across the broken overpass I tried to assemble what I
had of the man behind the wall (my lights flashing through two flowered grills of stone, a web of light around his body); I even wondered
what he'd jelt during our conversation. The one thing that cleared
when all my speculations fell away was
that I had an urge to
write. (Do you have
that restless ... ?
like it says in the
back of the magaWe didn't say all those things in that way; but that is what we talked about. Reading it over brings back the reality of it for me. Would it for him? Or have I left out the particular, per- sonal emblems by which he would recall and know it?
zines. Sure.) But sitting here, in a back booth at Teddy's, tonight, while
Bunny does her number to not-quite·as-many-as-usual customers (I
asked Pepper if he wanted to come with me but he really has this thing
about going in here. so I brought my notebook for company), I see all
it has produced is this account-and not what I wanted to work on.
(Bunny lives in a dangerous world; she wants a good man. What she
can get is Pepper ... no, an image Pepper at his best [when he can
smile] consents to give, but he's usually too tired or ashamed to. Is it
748 Dhalgmt
my place to tell her that, bringing my blasphemy to the altar steps,
sharing with her the data from my noon journey? I just wish I enjoyed
his dancing more.) This is not a poem. It is a very shabby report of
something that happened in the year of Our Lord it would be oh-soRice to, write down, month, day, and year. But 1. canJt.
If Dollar doesn't stop pestering Copperhead, then Copperhead will kill.
him. If Dollar stops pestering Copperhead, then Copperhead will let
him alone. If Copperhead is going to kill Dollar, then Dollar will not
have stopped pestering Copperhead. If Copperhead lets Dollar alone,
then Dollar will have stopped pestering Copperhead. Which of the
above is true? The one with the fewest words, orcourse. But that's
faulty logic. Why? Three times blessed is the Lord of Divine Words,
the God of Thieves, the Master of the Underworld, dualsexed in character, double dealing in nature, yet one through all diffraction.
her elbow across his jaw.
John said, "Hey ... !n and went back, hands up, palms out.
The sound she made was something I'd never heard out of anybody.
She kicked at his leg, got him under the knee. He grabbed at her arm
again but it wasn't there, so he pulled back.
And stumbled over a root, right up against the trunk. Which made
him really mad: he swung at her again.
She jumped. Straight up. His fist landed against her arm. She came
down raking at his neck. His shirt tore.
He hit her, hard. But it didn't miltter; I thought she was going to
bite his throat out. She bit something. He hissed, "Shit ... !"
Denny grabbed roy arm. "Hey, don't you wanna stop her ... ?"
"No," I said. I was scared to death.
John tried to punch her in the stomach.
Both of ,them twisted, missing.
Milly kept circling around them andJommy started to say, "Hey,
somebody ... " and then Saw the rest of us and just swallowed.
John pushed her away in the face. She grabbed his arm and yanked.
Not pulled, yanked. His elbow hit the tree. He yelled, and hit her flathanded in the jaw.
"FUCKER ... !" she shouted so loud you knew it hurt her throat.
"FlJCKER •.. !"
The Anathemata: a plague joumal 749
Her right fist came down from her left ear and hammered his face.
Like an echo his head cracked back against the trunk.
"Hey! Stop it ... Stop ... " Then I guess he really tried to break
out. He shouted, grabbed her wrist ...
She was meat red from the neck up, yanking her fist over, twisting
his fingers; then grabbed one fist with the other and swung it against
his neck.
"Jesus ... ' Jommy said, to me I realized. 'She's crazy ... " But he
stepped back from the look I gave him.
John tried to grab her in Some sort of bear hug. He kicked out, and
they both went down, him pretty much on top. Everyone stepped
back together.
Flailing out, she came up with a handful of grass. Then there was
grass in his hair and he yelled again.
His ear was bleeding. But I don't know what she'd done.
"Hey, look!" Milly said, loud and upset. "Why doesn't somebody ...• Then it struck her that if somebody was, the somebody was
going to have to be her.
She started forward.
I touched her on the shoulder and she looked sharply around.
"Fair fight,' I said.
He hit her three times, hard, one after the other: "Stupid. Bitch.
Stupid ... " but she somehow got him off. And reared back. She came
down with both fists on his face, once glancirfg oIThis ear and hitting
the ground and coming up for another hit; bloody. When she hit him
again-he was just trying to cover his face, now-I saw hers was
scraped up bad.
About the sixth time she hit him-one knee went into his stOmach-I thought maybe I should try and stop her. I thought about Dollar. I thought about Nightmare and Dragon l1ldy. But I wasn't as scared
as I'd been at the beginning, when I'd thought her quivering, shaking
rage would explode her.
Denny's mouth was open. He let go myarm.
She stood up, ahnost falling. "You fucking shit!· she said. It sounded like her jaw clicked between syllables. She kicked him in the head.
Twice.
"Hey, come on ...• one of the others said, and started toward her.
But didn't touch her.
Thinking: Maybe a tennis sneaker isn't that hard.
Sure.
750 Dhalgren
She turned and came, blindly, toward me.
As Denny rell back, she stopped, looked behind her and shouted,
"You f"eking shit!" and came on. Her face was all puffed on One side.
Two of the guys kneeled beside John. Milly hovered behind. them
as though she still couldn't make lip her mind. .
DOh, wow!" Denny said. "You really creamed the bastard!'
"The fucking shit!" she whispered, wiping at her face and grimacing. "The fucking ... " One eye was all teary. She started walking. We
walked with her.
"It looks like he got in a couple too," Denny said.
"She's walking," 1 said.
"Hey, you did better than Glass did with Dollar," Denny said.
"I had-" She took a breath. "r guess 1 had more reason." She rubbed
her shoulder with her palm, fingers strained wide. And left blood on
the workshirt sleeve. I don't think she knew she was bleeding yet.
"Hey; Ltnya?" Jack said. Frank stood behind his shoulder.
She stopped and looked.
She swallowed and I wondered if she remembered who he was.
1 was probably projecting.
"Thanks," Jack said.
She nodded, swallowed once more, and started walking again.
"Whafs the matter?" Denny asked about twenty yards later. "Your
eye hurt?"
She shook her head. "Ifs just that ... " She really sounded upset.
"Well, nice girls from Sarah Lawrence don't usually beat the fucking
. shit o"t of .•. » and gasped again.
1 put my arm around her shoulder. She fitted like usual. Only she
didn't adjust her step to mine. So 1 adjusted mine to hers. "Did you
want me to lend you a hand in there?"
"I would have pulled your balls off!" she said. "r would have ... I
don't know what I would have .•. "
1 squeezed her shoulder. "Just asking, babes."
She touched her jaw again, gently, realizing it hurt. And left blood
there. "The school was my thing. It wasn't yours. You didn't have anything to do with it. Yo" didn't even like Paul ... Oh, the fucking shit-!"
and stopped walking.
"I helped you with ,the class a couple of times,» Deany said. "Didn't
n" and glanced back at the others.
"Sure, "l.anya said,and put her hand oa his shoulder. l1henshewinced
and reached down to rub her leg. Not limping, she still favored it.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 751
Ul just don't understand why you lit into him," I said.
nOh, fuck you!" She pulled away from me. "You don't understand
a lot of things. About me."
"All right," I said. "I'm sorry."
"So am I, U she said, harshly. But when I caught up with her, she put
her arm around my shoulder. And adjusted her step.
UHey," Denny said. "You wanna be by yourself for a while?"
"Yeah1:1t she said. I do. n
She walked with us to the park entrance, so that I figured she was
going back with us to the aest. But by the lions she said, "1'1\ see you
later,» and just walked off.
"Hey ... " 1 called.
"She wants to be by herself," Denny said.
I sliH felt funny.
She did come back to the nest, late that night after we'd been in bed
(me half druDk) about an hour. Vaguely l heard her taking off her
clothes, then climbing the ladder pole.
She crawled aCross me, rolled me by the shoulder onto my back,
and, a-straddl.e my chest, glared down, swaying like she was going to
rip something out of me with her teeth. I reached between her legs
and pushed two fingers through he. hair between the granular walls;
they wet.
She leaned both hands on my chest, her arms pushing her breasts
together and actually growled.
Denny. wedged in the corner, turned over, lifted his head, and said
"Huh ... 1'. I
"You too I OJ she said. "You come here too!:II
I'v.e never. been balled like that before-puffy eye and sore leg
notWithstanding-by any one. (She said she'd spent the afternooD aad
evening With Madame Brown, just talking. 'You ever ball her?" Denny
wanted to know.) In the middle of a heavy stretch, Copperhead stuck
his head over the edge of the loft and asked, "What are you guys doing
up here anyway? You're gonna tear the loft down!·
"Get out of here," Denny said. "You had your chance.»
Copperhead grinned and got.
the streets this afternoon with Nightmare,listening to
of Lady: "Man, we "sed to do some freaky
things, all the t.me, any time, anywhere, right in the middle of.the
752 Dhalgren
fuckin' street, man,l swear." We ambled; he .pointed out doorways, alleys, a pickup truck parked on its axles-.- "Once with her sitting in the
cal> and me standing on the fuckin' sidewalk, a hand on either side of
the door, and my head just in there, eatin' out all that black pussyBaby and Adam running around someplace across the street-then I
fucked her in the back there, on the burlap. Oh, shit! "-and where, by
the park, she had pushed him up against the wall and blown him;
where she used to make him walk down the center of the street with
his genitals loose from his fly, 'with her sitting on the curb and doing
things with her moud., man, bofore I even got there, so 1 had a hardon out to here!" He talks out these celebrations as though ,they are religious rituals recently banned. Forty minutes of this, before it hit me
how lonely not only Nightmare is, but all of us here are: Who can I discuss tbe mechanics of Lanya and Denny with? 1 don't even have the
consolation of public disapproval. He probably bas never talked about
any of this before. On the marble steps of the Second City Bank building (he tells me) he made her take 01I all her clothes- 'Just like Baby,
maR. I mean people can go around in tbe street stark nak"d here, and
it don't mean nothlng"-.and urinate, white he stood 1>ehiad her, one
arm over her shoulder, catching he. water in his palm. "And once she
made me lie on my back, you know, in the center of the pavement-"
the incident illustrated witb much gesturing and head-shaking as we
seareh his memories out of the dry mist-"naked, man, and she just
walked around and around and around me, a big woman!" (He repeats
this last a lot, as thougb her cireling defined some terribly necessary
boundary on this wild terrain.) " ... made me eat her out for half an
hour,l swear, rigbt-" he looks around, surprlsed- "here, man. Right
herellt was just getting light, and you couldn't hardly see her ...• As
my attention drifted from his account, I thought of all the cliches about
how to act among violent people, current among the non-violent: Rise
to the first challenge Ot you'll be branded a coward for the rest of your
stay; a willingness to fight gains the group's respect; once you beat him,
the bully will1>e·your friend. Somebody coming into the nest with these
as functioning propositions would get killedl (Thinking: Frank?)
Nightmare'S shoulders rocked. His fists, wrists bound in leatiter,
bob1>ed. He recounted hoarsely: "She used to get me drunk and rd have
her suck me off, my.ass up against any old, cold, God-damn wall, with
my pants down around my fuckin' knees, and ber tryin' to get two fingers up my ass--don'( remember how she figntedout llike that.' Suddenly be looked up, frowning. "You think 1 was right?"
Tht Anathemata: a plague journal 753
"Huh?"
"When we had that garden party back at the nest." His meaty hand
returned to the fresh scars down his arm. "You think I done right?"
"Dragon Lady is her own woman," 1 said.
Nightmare asked: "What would you do if somebody pulled that shit
onyou?tI
"I think," I said, "I would have cut her head off. Just messing up
her arm for a couple of weeks-well, you both showed great restraint, n
"Ob." His hand, knotting, slid down his chest to knuckle his belly,
pensively.
"But nobody has ever pulled that on me," I said. "At least Dragon
Lady hasn't, yet. So 1 still dig you both."
"Yeah," Nightmare said. ·Sure. I understand. But nobody would do
you that way. They think you're too smart. They think they can talk
to you. Maybe that's why I gave you the nest, you know?"
That surprised me.
'Yeah," he went on, "like 1 said: It's time for me to get oUt of this
motherfuckin'sad-assed excuse for a_V
Behind his voice, children's voices: we were passing the curtained
windows of Lanya's school. Nightmare looked. The door was ajar on
darkness; laughter, juvenile shrieks, and chatter ...
I stepped up the curb Over the gutter grate. Nightmare followed. I
glanced back: his thick forehead skin creased in a squint; his lips
pulled up and down from the whole (and one broken) teeth.
I stepped through the door.
On the table, above the empty chairs, spools glimmered and spun
on lhe tape recorder. We watched a while, waiting. Beside me, Nightmare mauled and kneaded his bald shoulder, listening to the recorded noise in the vacated room. Scars, chains, and olIice, some thrust
away, some new received, habits without correlatives, jumbled in the
great bag of htm, as though his achievements and losses completed a
design mapped in the layout of the streets around us. Thinking: I may
never see this man again after today, if all
own eyes, for somewhere in this city is a character tbey call: The Kid.
Age: ambignous. Racial origin: same. true name: unknown. He lives
among a group (whose alleged viciousness is only surpassed by their
visible laziness) over which he holds a doubtful authority. They caU
754 Dhalgren
themselves scorpions. He is the supposed author of a book that has
been distributed widely in town. Since it is the only book in taWIl, that
it is the most discussed work of the season is a dubious distinction.
That and the intriguing siLliation of the author tend to blur accurate
assessment of its worth. I admit: I am intrigued.
Today I cut doWIl the block where I'd heard the scorpions had their
nest. "What kind of street do they live on?" In the grammar of another
city, that sentence would hold the implication: What kind of street are
they more or less constrained by society to live on, given their semioutlaw status, their egregious manner and outfit, and the economics
of their asocial position? In Bellona, however, the same words imply
a complex freedom, a choice from hovel to mansion-complex because every hovel and every mansion sustains through that choice
some remnant of Olir ineffable catastrophe: In any house here movement from room to room is a journey from a place where twin moons
have cast double shadows of the window sills upon the floors to a place
where once, because the sun had groWIl so immense, no shadow was
cast at all. We speak another language here. Is the real importance of
this chapbook that I've been brOWSing over all morning that, unlike
the newspaper, it is the only thing in the city written in this language?
If it is the only thing said, by default it must be the best thing. Anyone sensitive to language, living in this mess/miasma, must applaud
it. 15 there any line in it, however, that would be comprehensible outside city limits?
Five were sitting on the steps. Two leaned against the wrecked car
at the curb. Why am I surprised that most of them are black? The
flower-children, whose slightly demonic heirs these are, were so emphatically blond, and the occasional darky among them such an emphatic mark of tolerancel They were not sullen. There were three girls
This remains with me from my last convefSation
with Tak about Calkins and the party: "I had the
funniest dream last Kid. Not that I particularly care what it means-I interpret other
peoples' dreams and just try to enjOy my oWn.
Anyway, I had this little black kid, about thirteen
or fourteen, up at my place-Bobby? I think
you were catching a nap there once when he
came by. In the dream, he was just standing
there in a T-shirt, with half a hard-on, (Half a
hard-on on Bobby goes out to here!! Suddenly
I looked up and George was coming. across the
among them, one
an ebullient young
black gi.l. capped
with a large natural
and vastly pregnant.
They wore chains,
some as many as fifteen strands, some
as rew as two. They
were dir,ty and gregarious. They smiled
The Anathemata: a plague journal 755
rooftoward the door, as though he'd just come
up for a visit. When he stepped in, he saw us.
All the posters of him across the wall, I think but
I'm not sure, were staring at 'us too. And he had
this sort of mocking look that said, 'So that's
what you're after.' And I felt very guilty. Oh, the
point of it was that in the dream Bobby and I
weren't going to have sex. He wanted to show
me something on his cock-some sore or
something, And I felt all uncomfortable, like I'd
been trapped into being something that I'm
not, I mean given my choice of types-types
and not individuals-I'd rather have a Georgia
farm-boy any day. Not that I've ever kicked
Bobby out of bed. But it was a strange dream."
My first reaction was that Tak, who had always seemed a pretty big man, became much
smaller, Later I realized that the big man simply contained many components, among them
a small one.
and talked a sort of
quiet half-talk to
one another. Boots,
leather vests-no
shirts-and chains
made them look like
some 'cycle club in
Coventry. A tall,
skinny, black boyan
the top step had a
gallon of wine between his boot heels
which periodically
passed on its way to
the curb and back.
The white guy with
no vest and the
scarred stomach was
the only one who wiped the. neck-with a hand so grubby the other
colored girl, tall and hefty, refused to drink after him. The. others
laughed as if her rebuke contained more than was apparent. They did
not look at me as I strolled on the other side of the street.Lt is rumored
that these men and women can transform themselves in darkness to
any one of a gallery of luminous beasts; that they have weapons to' turn
the slung fIst into a fIve-way cutting tool. I wonder if anyone that I saw
there was the KidAlso wonder if writing about myself in the tltird person is really
the way to go about lOSing or making a name. My life here more and
more resembles a
book whose opening chapters, whose
title even, suggest
mysteries to be resolved only at closing. But as one reads
along, one becomes
more and more suspicious that the author
has lost the
thread of his M"guIt's not light yet. (Will ,it ever be?) returned from the third and what I hope is the last run, on the Emboriki. Don,'t even want to write about this one. But, as usual, will. (At least, he said and c.an you hear the cap's, They Will Not Be Both- ering Us Again, Tarzan's bizarrely reflective com- ment [echoing something he heard fromme?l: "It's easier here than any place else.") Raven, Priest, Tarzah, and Jack the Ripper
kept telling
me, "Man don't take Pepper along!"
II Anyone goes who wants to go, n I said. By
time we went, though, Pepper wasn't
around anyway. Dragon Lady
was waiting for Us
756 Dha!gren
in front of Thirteen,'s; Baby, b. a. as us
ual, pimple-,pocked and sullen, stood in the shadowed
doorway. His arms slung through his chains,
Adam sat on the curb, grumbling glu
mly. Cathe-,
dral. Revelation and Fireball and brought the
cans of
ment, that the questions will neV'er be
resolved, or more
upsetting, that the
position of the characters will ha"Ve so
changed by the book's end that the answers to the initial questions
will haV'e become mV'ia!. (It is Troy, Sodom, Abel <;:uyuk, the City of
Dreadful
an ocean of smoke and evening. I tried to smell it, but my nostrils
Were n1!lmb or acclimated. The lions gaped in the blurt. We neared the
fogged pearl of one functioning lamp, and her face got all twisted. She
stopped, turquoise, hem to knees, exploding high as her scarlet waist.
"Should we ... ? Oh, Kid!.Do you know what they said!"
·Will you please
..• " !asked her. My
throat hurt with
running and the
raw air. "Will you
please tell'me what
•.. what theysaidl"
Both hands came
up to cage her
mouth. She was a
shower of silveT
on metallic black.
up on the
toof of the bank:
The Second City
Bank-oh, a Goddamn sniper! H
"Who. for Christ's
sake?" 1 grabbed her
small elbows and
the haiT shook
around her head.
"Will you tell me
whathey got?"
Woke up this morning in, the dark loft. Heard a
handful of cars before I rolled to the window
and pulled back the shade. Sunlight opened
like a fan across the blanket. I climbed down
the ladder pole, dressed, and went outside.
The air was chill enough to see breath. The sky,
lake blue, was fluffed with clouds to the south;
the north was clear as water. I walked to the
end ofthe block. The pavement was dark near
the edge from pre·dawn rain. I stepped over a
puddle. At the bus stop-was it eight o'clock
yet?-stood a man in a quilted jacket carrying
a black enamel lunch box; two women with fur
collars; a man in a grey hat with a paper under
his arm; one woman in red shoes with big,
boxy heels. Across the street stood a long·
haired kid in an army jacket, thumb out for the
uphill traffic. He grinned at me, trying for my
attention. I thought it was beeause I'd left one
boot off, but he wanted me to look at something in the sky without attractin!!! the other
people at the stop. I looked up between the
trolley wires. White clouds hung behind the
downtown bu ildings, windows like a broken
honey comb running with brass dawn-light.
Pethaps twenty-five degrees of an are, airbrushed on the sky, were the pink, the green,
the purple ·of a rainbow. I looked back at the
The Anathemata: a plague journal 757
"Paul," she
pered. "Paul Fenster! The school,
Kid ... everything!"
"Is he dead?"
kid on the corner, but a seventy·five Buick
came gliste
ning to a stop for him and he was
getting OR
God oh Jesus, please oh please I
can't ,I please don't let it
Her head shook in a way that meant sh" didn't know. Her hands
twisted silver cloth at her hips: scarlet bled down from one; yellow
snaked across her belly from the other. "In the burning,» she said V'ery
quickly. "In the fire ... all your poems, the new ones; they burned
... !" Her lips kept touching and parting, sorting more words, none
of which fit. "EV'erything, all ·of them ... I couldn't .•. "
"Unnn ... n Something went right into my stomach without using
gut or throat for entrance, I said, "Unnn ... "
She let go her skirt.
"That's .. , good I guess," was all I could say. "I didn't like them.
So it's good they're .•. gone.'
"You should ha"Ve kept them in your notebook! 1 was wrong! You
should •.. " She shook her head. ·Oh, I'm so sony!"
I started to cough.
"Look," she said, "I know half of them by heart anyway. You could
reconstruct-tl
"Na,f) I said.
"-and Everett Forest made that ... "
"No. It's good they're gone.'
"Kid," she said, "what about Paul ... ? Up on the Second City Bank
building. Were you ... ? Oh, please try to remember!" Then she started as though she'd seen something (behind me? above me? were my
lights still on? I don't remember!), and turned. And ran, blazing gold
a moment before shadow took her and I ran after, into the brush, feet
This morning Filament brought around a
woman who I first thought was Italian and who
became Black Widow this evening. Overheard
her in a discussion in the back yard just nowone of the few here that has even veered near
any politics outside the city: "It's not that men
and' Women are identical; itls just that they are
so near identical in all but the political abuses
and privileges that are lavished on the one and
visited on the other that to talk of 'innate' differences as significant, even to childbirth, is to
hold up the color of the hair, the strength of a
crashing in leaves
and ash. Her bright
hem whipped back
till she became
some darker color.
(Thinking: Who is
in control of her?
Who, less than fifty
yards off, is following through the undergrowth, twisting
758
limb, a predilection for over mathemat.-
ics or vice versa, as a :pre-determiniA! factor in
who shall be treated how, with no appeal; while
to ignore those abuses and privileges is to
nore oppression, exploitation, even genocide,
even while these are shaping conscience, consciousness, and rage. n I, was impressed. But I
have heard similar from Nightmare, Dragon
Lady, Madame Brown, Tak, D-t, Bunny, even
Tarzan. Is Bellona, then, that unbelievable field
where awarenesses of such an order are the
only real strength? That they can occUr here is
what makes possible the idea of leaving for another city.
the knobs, pushing
the switches that
change her from
scarlet to ultramarine?) My bare foot
passed from COncrete to grass. The
night billowed and
sagged. Did habit
gUide us through
the maze of mists?
I Saw the quivering (ires.
The brass dish, big across as a car tire, had been dragged twenty
reet over the ashy grass. I felt very high. Thought swayed through my
mind, shattered, sizzled like water on coals. Something in the
smoke-? 1 raised my arm.
Brass leaves, shells, claws-from the ornamented wrist band, overlong blades curved up around my hand. In the dish, small blue flames
hung quivering over the red. Fire light dripped down the blades.
I took another step, flexing just the scarred fingertips.
Something tickled my shoulder.
I whirled, crouching. 'the leaf rolled down my vest, fluttered
against the chains, brushed the worn place at my knee, spun on the
ground. Gasping, I looked up the leaning trUnk. Above, shadow coiled
in the bole of some major branch, struck away by lighming.
The .air was still. But suddenly dead leaves I could not see thundered above, loud as jets. Holding my mouth wide as I could, I leaned
forward. The side of
my foot pressed a
root. Thigh, belly,
chest, cheek lay up
against the bark. I
breathed deep for
the woody smell
and pushed my
body into the trunk.
With my bladed
bnd I stroked the
About a third ofthe nest says "must of," distinct
and clear, They think it, too. They aren't saying
"must've/' Of r,nust'a'," .either, J notice it
ically in D·t, .Filament, Raven, Spider, Angel,
Cathedral, Devastation, Priest. So: they are
going through different word to word. process
than the rest of us (Tarzan, for instance, who
says "must'a"'}-I think we feel any verb
in that at all, while the people who say "must of"
do feel something prepositional, or at.least genitive. A word hits my ears and inside my heacd a
sensory -recall forms-a memory of an object,
bark till I felt the
trunk move. Sweat
rolled under my
vest. Chains bit my
belly; glass bits
pressed about me;
bark gnawed my
cheek. Above, in the
roaring, I heard a
crack; not the sound
wood makes broken
against the grain,
but when it splits
longways. And there
was a smell, stronger than the smoke:
vegetative, spicy, and
fetid.
Another crack:
but that was gun. or
backfire, louder than
leaves and across
the park. I pushed
back from the trunk,
blinking away the
water in my eyes.
Something fell, rocked
on the grass among
the roots; and something else-shards
or bark, twelve or
twenty inches across.
Bark split in front of
me, sagging out a
rew inches. What
was behind it, I
could see by the
light from the dish,
was red; and moist;
The Anathemata: a plague journal 759
dim and out of focus, the recollection of a
sound, a smell, or even a kinesthetic
tion, The recalls are unclear-there is always
margin for correction. As word arrives after
word, the reca'lls join and correct each other,
grow brighter, clearer, become precise: a ...
huge . .. pink . .. mouse! What do I mean when
I say a word means something? Probably the
neuro/chemical process by which one word
sounded against the ear generates one inner recall. Human speech has so little variance to it, so
'little creativity: I sit on the steps and scan an
hour's conversation around me (my own
ed) and find once two words in new juxtaposition. Every couple of days such a juxtaposition
will evoke something particularly apt about
what the speaker (usually Lady of Spain or D-t;
seldom me) is talking about. But when it happens, everyone notices:
"Yeah, Yllah! That's rightl" and laughter,
"1 like that!" and someone grins,
"Yeah, that's pretty good."
In college I would scan and find one such language node in ten hours of speech, sometimes
in two or three days. Though, there, people
were much more ready to approve the hackneyed, the cliche, the inept and imprecise.
Is that why I write here?
Is that why I don't write here much?
In the middle of this, Lanya says: "Guess who
I had dinner with last night."
Me: "Who?"
She: "Madame Brown took me to the
Richards","
Me: "Have a good time?" I admit, I am
prised,
She: "It was ... educational. Like your party.
I think they're people I'd rather see on my territory than on theirs. Madame Brown feels the
opposite. Which probably means I won't see
much of them."
Me: "What did you think of June?"
She: "I liked her. She was the only one I
could really talk to ... the hallway down stairs
still stinks; weird going past it in the elevator
and knowing what it was. I told her all about the
760 Dhalgren
and moved. Something crashed down
through the branches, but caught in
them. I heard more
wood split, and
something like a
mOan. "Lanya I" I
shouted loud as I
oould. "lanya!" Leaves
swelled to a roar
again.
I took another
step back-a sudden pain along my
calf. I whirled, staggering. My bare heel
had scraped the
high, raised rim of
hot metal. I danced
away from spilled
coals; rocking, the
edge had scraped
halfway to my knee.
There were more
gunshots. I began to
run.
Very far ahead was
a working nightlight
(thinking: There's
going to be a riot!
With Fenster shot,
House. She was fascinated. A few times Arthur
and Mary overheard us and were scandalized.
But not many." She rubs the lion's back (where
bright metal scars the brown patina), looks out
the window. "I think she's go1ng to find George,
soon. When she does, we aU better watch out."
Me: "Why? What'li happen?"
She smiled: "Who knows? The sky may
crack, and giant lightning run the noon's black
nylon; and the oddest portents yet infect the
ceiling of the skull." She was mocking with mis·
quotation what I'd given herto read that morning. Her turning it into something inflated like
that made me uncomfortable.
She realized it and laid three fingers on my
arm. But her touch was 1i5lht as a leaf; I quivered. 'You'd
prefer to be hit than tickled,
wouldn't you." She firmed her grip.
"Yeah," Il'said. "Usually. fl
She watched me, green eyes dark as gun
metal in the crowded room. Almost everyone
was asleep. We went into the front.
The sky reaches in through screen doors and
un-curtained windows and wipes color off the
couches, tables, pictures, posters htlng.
Outside the streets are quiet as disaster
areas after evacuation, more claustrophobic
than inside, rank as our den is with heat and
sleepy shiftings.
People think of us as energetic, active, violent. At any time, though, a' third of us are
asleep and
half have not been out of the nest
for two, three, four days (it is seldom noisy here;
as seldom silent); we nestle in the wordweb that
spins, phatically, on and on, sifting our meaning
and meanings, insights and emotions, thin as
what drifts the gritty sky.
the blacks are going to be out all over Jackson and there's going to be
. a debacle from Cumberland Park too ... ) I tried to remember which
way the park exit was.
In all the trees around the leaves were loud as jets.
I thought ofturning on my lights, but I didn't. Instead, I got offthe
path-stumbled, nearly twisted my ankle, the one I'd scraped. I
climbed up SOme rocks where I couldn't see a thing; so I figured no
The Anathemata: a plague journal 761
one could see me. I Sat there, wedged between stones, eyes half closed,
trying to be still.
I wondered if they were waiting for me. If I did get oUt of the park,
it would be my luck to stumble out the Cumberland exit, where the
burning was heaviest. I ran my haed around the orchid's wristband.
Light through the leaves startled me. I kneeled forward, sure it was
going to be bright shields.
It was a bunch of people with flashlights. When they passed-I
pressed myself back against the rock, and one light swept right over
me, for a moment directly in my eyes beyond the branches-it was
pretty easy to see that they were mostly white; and they had rifles.
Two of them were very angry. Then one among them turned back and
shouted: "Muriel!» (It could have been a woman calling.) The dog
barked, barked again, and rushed through a wandering beam.
I closed my mouth.
And my eyes.
For a long time. A very long time. Perhaps I even fell asleep. When
I opened them, my neck was stiff; so was one leg.
The sky was hazy with dawn. It was very quiet.
I got up, arms aed knees sore as hell, climbed over the rocks and
kept on down the other side till I came out of the trees at the edge of
the clearing.
The cinderblocks on the near side of the fireplace had been pushed in.
Smoke dribbled into the air. Ashes greyed the grass.
There was no one there.
I walked to the furnace, between cans and package wrappers. On
the bench was an overturned garbage carton. With my boot-toe, I
scraped at some cinders. Half a dozen coals turned up as eyes which
blinked, simplified, and clapped up.
"lanyalH
They squatted to the furnace, simulatable in every break on those
fenestrated, rusty fill-ins. Only for a distance in civet furrow; here hid
awfully just a million savants at the pot. An open egret hung around
a perch-still she could stay here any night. The honey worts and
wolfling braces amazingly lined askew in weevils or along a posthole
should report.
"Lanyal'"
An apple to discover? Sti1l they should have saved around what or
fixed her. Except in the underpinned white shell, here are some scabs
---------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
762 Dhalgrll1l
in p11tple; every beach but effluvia. And they had bought us 11p to mix
here So few concepts with the lazy drinks, had sat sober or reinstated
our personal fixated intensity. Soon they cauterized what you, Constancy and exegesis, were found very loose around hint that we had
each, without Denny explahring, fished to fascinate them, beautiCully
or lazily. They should have allowed her less than an alligator has an
eyelid never pulled her from a qUiver; terror still Celt less alive.
"Lanya?:rt
1 turned to fixative among the walkings.
Beyond the leaves, the figure moved So that 1 still couldn't
The blue envelope, barred along its edge with red
and navy, is held to the bottom of above page
with yellow, bubbled Scotchtape. There are two,
canceled, eight-cent stamps in the upper, right-hand
comer. The postmark is illegible. The Bellona address reads:
Mrs. Arthur Richards
The Labry Apartments (#17-El
400, 36th Street
Bellona, U.S.A.
The return address, written in the same hand (both
in green ink):
Ms. Julia Harrington
7 Lilac ViSta
Los Angeles 6, Califorma
The letter itself has either been removed or lost.
When I came 11p the stairs, her office door was closed. So I wandered
from the study to the kitchen into Lanya's room and back. Finally I sat
on the edge of the desk in the hall, tilted the Newboy volumes from
between the statuettes, piled them beside me, and began to flip pages.
Which was £11nay: After five minutes I still hadn't read one whole
poem, or one complete paragraph from the essays or stories. My eyes
could only focus before or behind the page. That part of the brain, directly behind the eye, that refracts the jewelry of words into image,
idea, or information, wouldn't work. (l even wondered a while how
much of that was because I'd heard him speak.) The books had genThe Anathemata: a plague journal 763 erated ghosts of themselves, and I couldn't read the words for their after-images. I kept picking up different volumes, hefting them, closed, OR my palm, putting them down, then hefting my emptied palm again, feeling for the ghost's weight. My stomach began to hurt because I Was concentratiag so widely. I put them aU back-first I ordered them by the dates on the copyright pages-and walked for a while (remember the fourth day on speed?), returning to the desk, pulling the books out agaia, leaving-really finding I'd wandered away just as I'd turn around to go back. What it is around these objects that vibrates so much the objects themselves vaniSh? A field, cast by the name of a man, who, without my ever having read a complete work of hiS, the hidden machinery of my consciousness at Some point decided was an artist. How COmical, sad, exhausting. Why am I a victim of this magic? But for all I recog- nize out of me, I wonder furiously who would hold Brass Orchids on their hand, hefting for noumenal weight? "Kid?" Madame Brown's body and face were sliced by the door. "You're here. Good." "Hello." I closed The Chartemouse of Ballarat. "You ready for me to come in now? n She opened the door the rest of the way; I got off the desk. "Yes,let's begin.l hope I didn't keep you waiting ... ?" okay." r walked into the room. Coming in to the dull green walls, dark wood up to the waiSt, a day bed with a green corduroy spread, three big leather chairs, a tall book- shelf, dark green drapes, I had to readjust my spatial model of the house: It was the biggest room on the floor and I'd never been in it. On the wall was a swing-out diSplay rack, like in poster shops. I walked over, started to open it, glanced at Madame Brown- "Go ahead." -and turned the first leaf, expecting George: The raddled earth hung above tilted, lunar shale. On the next, a bulky astrOnaut stared out hiS half-silverecl faceplate. All the pic- tures-I went through some dozen-were of the moon, or Mars, or the familiar faces ·0£ astronauts, necks ringed with helmet clamps- two of a younger, closer-cropped Kamp-or their polished angular equipment (the foil-wrapped module foot under which Kamp:S moon mouse had fled), plastic flags, or pale, cirrus clQuds, hind lit by e8:haust- light as the rocket rose above its stanchions.
764 Dhalgren
Let Kamp smirk out on our session? No,l turned to a chalky scape,
backed by an earth with clouds like a negative thumb-print. Or a
saucepan of soured milk a moment before it boils; and went to a chair.
"Comfortable there?" Madame Brown closed the door. "You can lie
down on the couch if it's easier for you to talk that way.'
"No. I'd rather see you."
She smiled. "Good. And I'd ralher see you.' She sat in one of the
other chairs at a slight angle to me, a hand on the arm, a hand in her
lap. "How do you feel about talking to me?"
• A little nervous," I said. "I don't know why: I've talked to enough
shrinks before. I was thinkiog, though, its all right here because there
aren't any mental hospitals left, So you can't put me away."
"Do you reel that the other doctors you talked to-perhaps the doctors you saw before you went into the hospital the first time-put you
away?" She said ,that pretty openly, not with any sarcastic quotes
around put you away. .
But suddenly I was angry: 'You don't know very much about crazy
people, do you?"
"What do you want to tell me about them?"
"Look-I'm very suggestive. Labile ... like they say. I incorporate
things into my . . reality model very quickly. Maybe too qUickly.
Which is what makes me crazy. But when you tell us we're sick, or
treat us like we're sick, it becomes part of ... me. Then lam." And I
wanted cry, at once, surprisingly, and a lot.
"What's the matter?D
1 wanted to say: I hate you.
"r don't .• , don't think you think at all!" Then I cried. It really did
surprise me. I couldn't move my hands. But I lowered my head to stop
what hurt in the back of my neck. Water trickled the side of my nose.
Thinking: Christ, that was fast! and sniffing when the silence got on
my nerves.
"Did you like the hospital where you were?"
·Ukeit ... ?"lraisedmyhead. "You're the one who said to me ... "
Another tear rolled. I felt cold. " ..• no, you said about learning to love
the people at hand? Well there were a lot of very hurt people there,
who it was very hard to learn to love, very el<pensive-emotionally.
But I guess I did."
"Why are you crying?"
"Because I don't believe in magic." I sniffed again; this time someThe Anathemata: a plague journal 765 thing salty the size of a clam slid back out of my nasal cavity and I swallowed it. 'You're a magic person, sitting there. You're sitting there because you think you can help me." "Do you need help?" I was angry again. But it was deep and bubbled down below things. "I don't knOw. I really don't knOw. But that doesn't have anything to do with the fact that what you believe.· "Youre angry at me. D I took a deep breath. "Not ... really." The bubbles, one after the other, broke. I absorbed the fumes that raged . My stomach was very tight. all right if you aFe. You may have good reason.· "Why should ... ?" and stopped because 1 could think of about ten. I said: 'You're smug. You're not sympathetic. You think you under- stand. And you don't. .. " "I don't understand yet; and I don't know whether I'll be able to. As of now, you haven't given me any reason to be sympathetic. If I'm smug, well ... I'd rather I weren't, but I can feel some reserve in my- self about getting too close to you just yet; which may be what smug- ness is," "I don't think you can understand." 11ugged both hands together in my lap and pushed them against one another. They felt numb. So did my feet. ·What do you feel like now?" "Uke not much of anything." "Does it make you want to cry again?" I took another breath. "No. I don't . . . " I put my head back. "I think I lost it, whatever was coming out ... " "Are you a very emotional person? Do you cry often?" "That's the first crying I've done in •.. three years, maybe four ... a long time. tt She raised her eyebrow. After a moment, she said: "Then you're probably under a great deal of pressure. What kind of pressure are you under?11 "I think I'm going crazy. And I don't want to. I don't like it. Ilike life, I like living. I Iilte going on around me, all of it to watch, and most of it to do. There're all sOrts ·of people and situations around 1 really enjoy. And I'm at a place where I don't have to worry about all sorts of olhers I don't. I don't want to go nuts again. Not now."
766 Dhalgren
After a moment she smiled: "I've occasionally given therapy to
some rather successful business executives; lots of money, happy families, some even without ulcers-who've said practically the same
thing in the same way. We do know each other outside the office, and
I must admit, from what I've observed myself, and from what Lanya's
told me, I find it a little ironic; I mean that you express it in such similar words.1:I
"I said you wouldn't understand. I said I was afraid-and I am
angry-that I don' tthink you Can. "
"Tell me the symptoms of your going crazy."
"I forget things. I don't know who I am ... I haven't been able to
remember my name for months. 1 wake up, sometimes, terrified,
everything in a blood-colored fog, which beginS to clear while my
heart beats so loud it hurts my chest. I've lost days, days and days out
of my life. I see things, sometimes, like people with their eyes ... "
And I felt my back snarl with fear. Sweat rolled down the underside of
one arm. "People with ... " I closed my mouth, so astonished I couldn't say it that I couldn't say it. I backtracked in my mind, looking for
something I could loop with words. "Can I ... 1" I had to back up further; I was looking at the multiple loops of optic chain she wore
around her neck. "Can I toll you about ,a •.. dream?"
·Please go right ahead."
"I dreamed ,that ... well, I was in a woods, on the side of a mountain. The moon was shining-one moon. And this woman, a nice
looking woman, a few years older than me, she came walking up over
the rocks and through the leaves. She was naked. And we balled, right
there in the leaves. Like that. When we were finished, she got up and
ran off through the bush-"
"-you completed making love in the dream?'
·Yes. After we carne, she got up and ran off through the woods to
this cave, and told me to go inside it."
• And you obeyed her?"
·Yes. I remember that very clearly. I remember' stepped on same
leaves once, in some water; I jumped over a crack in the cave floor. In
a niche in one wan ,of the cave there waS a brass thing, big around as
my two arms, filled with glOwing coals and little flames. I climbed this
rock edge, and I found ... " I touched the chain aCross my chest. "I
dreamed 1 found these there." I hooked the chain with my thumb and
watched Madame Brown. "I mean it must have been a dream; because
of what happened later." She looked more intense; a fourth line
The Anathemata: a plague journal 767
crossed her forehead. '" put them on. But when I came out, she was
gone. , looked for her in the woods, until I came to a moonlit roadjust before, I remember, I stepped in a mud puddle. I was stililrying
to figure out where she'd gone when I saw her, there, in a meadow, on
the other side of the road. So I started toward her, across the grass.
And she turned into a tree. For sOme reason, in the dream, thatterrified me. So I ran away. back down the road. Until I got to a highway.
The rest of it is a little vague. , remember for part of it , was riding in
a truck with this man with a sort of scarred-up face. Like bad pockmarks or acne. And this funny conversation about ... Or maybe it
wasn't really a conversation. One or the other of us just mentioned
something in some connection that I don't remember . .. )t
"That's am" Her fingertips Came together.
"That\; all,' I said, while her hands parted, touched her knees. "But
it was so .. . strange!"
"What made it particularly strange?"
"Well, everything happened so ... clearly. And when this woman
changed, I was so scared. I mean' was incredibly frightened. I ran
away, I mean . .. u
Madame Brown crossed her legs.
Across her calf, glazed with nylon, a scratch curved down to her
ankle.
She asked: "What is it?"
I tried to open my mouth, felt my face twi.tch.
She waited a long time.
I tried a couple more times.
My fingers were knotted together. Separating them was hard as pry_
ing lip from lip.
But I tried.
And sank backward in myself as if my eye-sockets were caves and
the balls were rocketing toward the back of my skull, in rebound from
the effort.
"Tell me about Lanya."
"Denny-' the cave wasn't where I lived, though- "and me, we
like her a lot.'
She mlllmed. "Tell me about Denny."
"Lanya and me like him ... a lot."
My hands came apart. I was able to move again on the chair. I
looked at her leg. But it was only terror. I took a couple of breaths,
smiled.
768 Dhalgrrn
"What are you feeling?"
'"Scared."
"That 1 disapprove of the relation between the three of you?"
"Huh?" That surprised me. "Why should I you disapprove?
LanylOs never said anything about you not liking it. A couple ofdmes
she's said it confused you,. but like a joke. God damn, you don't disapprove of the Richards, why should you disapprove of us?"
"Well, for one thing, the Richards are a normal, healthy family.
They aren't coming to me for help; and they don't think they're going
crazy.'"'
"More power to mel" She'd catapulted me into a completely different part of my head and I'd dropped hard. L got myself together to
see where 1 was-it had been a jolt. But this anger was very easy to
make words: ·You disapprove of people who come to you for help?"
that's not what 1-"
·Jesus Christl Hey; what do you-" 1 leaned forward.- ·what do
you think o£,the Kid? Sometimes 1 getlhe impression that\; all anybody around here ever does-though I'm sure I'm just flattering myself. Tell me."
She joined fingertips, raised eyebrows; suddenly she asked: ·What
do you think of the
Richards, Kid?"
"1 don't know
. . ." Then I said:
"She's frightening. 1
mean she spends all
that energy keeping
up a delusional system that just won't
hold. But that's sort
of heroic, too. Him?
He's despicable. He
paid . for all the
props; the system is
set up to his specifications, and aH to
his profit." Then I
asked: "Do they
eVen know you're
black?"
Lanya surprises me once more: The whole
nest out in the yard, she asks, "Hey, how come
Kid is the head scorpion in this nest? I mean
Nightmare was before, and then Kid. I would
have thought you'd have a black running
things."
"Yeah,. II Tarzan says. "Me too." While everyw
body else looks like they'd never thought anything ofthe kind. But I have; so I waited.
Finally Glass laughs: "Well, of course Nightmare was sharing it with Dragon Lady. But I
think more ar less everybody has got it in their
head that after one of these runs or other, the
shit is gonna come down. Hard. When it does,
you gonna see some niggers fade in the night
like nobody's business. But the chief scorpion,
maybe, ain't gonna be able to fade quite so
fast. So that if this dumb-ass white motherfucker-" Glass put his arm around my shoulder and gave me a big grin. "-wants to stick
around here and play superman, ain't no nigger with any sense gonna stand in his way. I
mean the guy in charge is the one who gets
·Yes. Of course
theydo."
"I'm surprised. n
u1 suspect a lot of
things would surprise you, even about
the Richards."
"Do they know
you're gay?lt
Madame Brown
moved in chair
and Mmmed again,
negatively. "Let me
see, n she said after a
moment: "Black,lesbian, I'm also very
The Anathemata: a plague journal 769
zapped. At least, that's the way it works anyplace else ... " Glass squints up at the sky.
Copperhead seemed to think it was funnier
than anybody else.
Fireball said: "He's white? I didn't know
that. He's darker than I am!"
lIMan," Glass said, Uthe Kid is an Indian."
"Now I didn't know he was white," Fireball
repeated. "He's crazy as a nigger."
Tarzan gave me a smile that dribbled strychnine.
"An' he sure likes his little blond brothers
and sisters." Fireball (whose spade accent,
more than anyone else's, -comes on and off for
the occasion) pointed to Lanya and Denny.
(Denny laughed.) "The Kid is really something
else, man.
Really something." (Lanya was pensive.)
middle class. And Mary and Arthur are my friends. But 1 wish sometimes I didn't think you were So right. It would make my life much
easier. But then, I've never particularly wanted an easy life, really.' She
sighed. Ul do find this in myself, Kid: When 1 occasionally get exasperated with Arthur Or Mary; especially when they're going on about
you, 1 wonder to myself-quite honestly-what they would say if I
told them some ·of the things you've actuaUy done-just for the upset
it would cause. At that point, 1 tell myself it\; hecause 1 'approve' of
you and don't 'approve' of them. •
"If you want to upset them, you could tell them some things about
June, about Bobby and ..• whats his name? Eddie,"
"Of course, you side with the youngsters-"
UNo," !said. "I'm nearly thirty years old. And 1 wouldn't swear to
which side ofit I'm on, from what some people tell me. I'm not taking Sides; I'm just pointing out Some upsetting areas in their life that
are a little closer to home.'
"To the Richards' home. What about yours?"
·You were going to tell me what you thought about the Kid. Maybe
you'll tromp on something and I'll twitch for you. "
• All right. I think ... "
1 looked at her leg_
o ••• you are very disturbed. You are personable, intelligent, forceful, But your basic ego structure is about as stable as a
cracked teacup. You say you've lost bHs and pieces of yourself? 1 think
770 Dhalgr£ll
thatS exactly what's happened. The point is, Kid, we still don't treat the
mentally ill as though they were just sick We treat them as though they
were Some strange combination of undean, depraved, and evil. You
know; the lbst mental hospitals in Europe were leprosaria, deserted all
over the continent at the end of the middle ages because-for some
reason we still don't know-there was a spontaneous remission in the
disease over about seventy-five years, though it had been endemic for
the last three thousand. Was it rising hygiene standards? A mutation
in tbe germ? The point is that till then, though they had occaSionally
beeR shipped about on local rivers, the insane had never been hospitalized before. But when were suddenly confined in these immense, empty buildings that, in sOme <:ases for hundreds of years, had
held lepers, they took on as well the burden ofthree thousand years of
superstition and rear connected with that unfortunate disease. And a
good argument can be made that that's still more or less how we regard
you today-complete with religious connotations. Mental Ulness is still
seen as a scourge of the lord. Freud and his offspring turned it into a
much more sophisticated scourgo:. But even for him it is essentially a
state of distress resulting from how you have lived your life and how
your parents have lived theirs. And that is biblical leprosy, not [he common cold. tell me, what would you say to the idea that all your problems-the hallucinatioRS, the depressions, even the moments of ecstasy-werebiogenic? That the lapses of memory are an RNA depletion
in the lower cor [ex; that the sudden rears are adrenal disruptions
caused by random pituitary spasms; that the unreality tha[plagues you
is merely a pineal cyst, inhibiting the production of serotonin?"
I looked up on the moonscape where there were no trees.
"That's sure as hell wnat it feels like," I said.
"Then, you differ from the bUSinessmen, in that they are usually
rather reluctant to give llP any or the extrabiological Significance of
their symptoms. The over-determined human mind would rather have
everything relevant, even if the relevance is Simple-minded.»
"When 1 was in the hospital-" remembering, I smiled- "I used
to have a friend who'd say: 'When YOlf're paranOid, everything makes
sense.' But that's not quite it. It's that all sortS of things you know don't
relate suddenly have the air of things that do. Everything you look at
seems JUSt an inch away from its place in a perfectly cle",r pattern. "
Ollce more I looked at ner leg. ·Only you never know which inch to
move ... " 1 felt my face wrinkling over my skull with concentration.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 771
She said: ·Your dream. Can you think why you particularly wanted to tell me about it?"
!looked at my lap; "I don't knOw. I've just had it on my mind a long
time."
"You mean it isn't a recent dream?"
·Oh, no. 1 had it ... I don't remember when; while 1 was still staying in the ... park?"
"And i.t isn't a recurrent dream?D
"No.1 only had it once. But it ... 1 just keep thinking about it."
ORe hand at her necklace, she fingered a lens. "I asked you this before, but 1 want to chock: In the dream, you made love, had an orgasm,
and then went to the cave. It wasn't just a heavy necking session?"
"No. She camefirst. I remember it surprised me, because I was just
about ready myself. I finished up about thirty seconds after sbe didwhich is unusual with me. Usually it takes me a couple of minules
longer. When I shot my load, leaves blew against my side. And I
opened my eyes and we talked for a while."
Madame Btown mulled, a glass bead pressed to her chin. "I was on
a research team that did a study some years ago-dirty old lady that I
am-about Sel< dreams. We had, admittedly, a small sampling-two
hundrod and thirty-nine; they'd all Checked yes to thequesrion:
whether they felt they had satisfactory sexual outlets. We had men,
women, a few late adolescems; some homosexuals, of both sexes. One
overwhelmingly consistent pattern was that when sex, in a dream, led
to actual orgasm, either the dream ended or the sllbject awoke. Of
course there was nothing conclusive about the study, and I can make
a list of biasing factors an e1110ng. But yours is the first dream I've ever
encountered, during or since the study, whete orgasm was achieved
and the dream continued." She looked at me like she was wailing for
a confession.
"What am I supposed to say?"
"Anything that comes to mind."
·YGU think I didn't have tbe dream? You think I'm lying, or that
maybe the dream was ... " 1 hunched my shoulders and felt silly. "I
don't know ... "
"You want me to suggest it wasn't a dream? That it was real?" She
gave a sudden, small frown. "Yes, you do, don't you? Well, I can understand that-if it seemed real to YOll." Underlying her frown was a
slight and slightly sad smile. "But it was a dream, Kid. Because .. _.
772 Dhalgren
She paused; and 1 wondered what moons and suns returned to devil
her memory. "Well, let's assume it wasn' t. Would you like to discuss
it further? What's the first thing that comes to mind?"
"I'm frightened, all of a sudden," 1 said. "Again."
"Ofwhat?"
·Of you." 1 tried a smile and felt it abort deep in the muscles of my
face.
"What about me frightens you?"
1 looked at her scarred leg. r looked at the bead she rubbed against
her chin. (I remembered what she had said, when I first met her, about
them; 1 remembered what Nightmare had said. What Nightmare had
said made more sense. But 1 want to believe her. Doesn't that count
for sOmething?) "I dorrt ... 1 can't ... " I began to cry again. And 1
couldn't stop this time. At all. "It's got to be a dream! It's got to ... »
Could she hear it for my sobbing? "If it isn't a dream, then 1 ... I'm
crazy!' And I cried about all. the things people can not undersland
when other people say them. I cried over the miracle that they could
uaderstandanything at all I cried for all the things I had said to other
people that had been
misunderstood because not
ing, had. said them
wrong, 1 cried with
joy about thosetimes when someone a,nd 1 had nodded together, grinning over an understa-nding, real or
wished for. A couple
of times 1 managed
to choke out; "I'm
so frightened . . .
I'm so frightened!
I'm so alone!" 1
pushed my fingers
inlo roy mouth 10
stop the sound, rocking forward and back,
Denny's.circumcised; )'m not. After we all
made it this afternoon, he sat wedged in the
10ft corner and1<ept asking tanya which kind of
dick she liked more: ' . . . one that's still got curtaiRS Or one that's been c:ut?"
"It doesn't ""Y difference to me." She
sat cross-legged with my feet in her lap, playing with my toes. _
"But which do you think is sexier?"
ul don't think it matters. They both feel the
"But don't
you think one ,looks better?"
IINo. I don't."
"But they are different; so you have to feel
different about them. Which one ... ?" and on
and on till I got bored lying there listening.
To stop it, I asked him: "Look, which one do
you like more?"
NOh. Well, I guess ... " He forward.
hunching his shoulders. "The one that's still got
it all there ... like yours, is better.'
·Oh: tanya said. with a puzzled look as
though she'd suddenly understood something.
About him.
bit on them, and
coulcln't stop.
Madame Brown
brought me Kleenex.
1 blubbered, "Thank
The Anathemata: a plague journal 773
"Yeah/' Denny grinned, came out of his cora
nero and lay down with his head on my lap_
Lanya nodded, swung out from under my
legs, and lay down with her head on Denny's
lap. I put my feet in hers.
you," taO inarticulate to be understood, and cried in despair that I
could not even make that clear. I wandered back far enough in the
cave to think, "This has got to be good for something,' but climbed
up the rocks where she told me to go, in ,the orange flicker, and didn't find anything there, so got scared again and cried and rocked in
my seat, the pits above my kneecaps hurling, which is the place that
hurts when 1 want ,to fuck bad. and kept crying and biting the sides
of my hands for what seemed hours but was probahly only fifteen,
twenty minutes.
And it lessened; 1 felt weaker, better, and when 1 quieted, Madame
Brown said: 'You know, you asked me what I think ·of you? On the
strength of the amnesia, the anxiety attacks, yes, that alone would
make me suggest, if we were someplace else, that you go into a hospital. But as you say. there aren't any mental hospitals in Bellona any
more. And. frankly. I don't know quite what they'd do for you if you
went It might take some of the pressure off you of being 'the Kid.'
Perhaps that would aHow some things to heal that are wounded, some
things to settle in place that are swollen."
I nodded as though I was considering what she said-which wasn't
what I was doing at all. "Do you .. _. 1 asked. "Do you believe __ . in
my dream?"
IlPardon me.?!!
"Do you believe 1 had that dream?"
She looked confused. "I'm not SQre what you meall. BQt ... don't
you?!l
·Yes," 1 said "Oh,Jesus Christl doll _ .. I believe it was a ... I had
that dream.' And realized there Was a whole well of anguish from
which only a single cup had been dipped. She hacln' t underst()od. But
that was all right.
Over het face was a mask of compassion: "KId, there was nothing
in the study to say that it couldn't happeR the way you said. You remember it very clearly. and told all the details. Yes, I believe it was a
dream. 1 don't know whether or not you do, buHt's probably not a bad
idea for you to keep trying.'
774 Dhalgren
Over mine was a mask of relief: "Madame Brown, n I said, "I am not
going back into a mental hospit"l. The place I was in, for a leprosarium, was pretty nice. But I think I'd have to be crazy to go into one
again. And you can read that any way you wantl"
That made her laugh. "Though, in Bellona, the problem would be
if you wanted to go in a hospital." Suddenly she cocked her head the
other way. "Do you know why I offered you that job with the Richards,
the morning I met you in the park?"
"You said it had something to do with-" I put two fingers on the
optic chain across my chest- "these."
"Did I. .. ?" Her smile tumed .nward, became preoccupied. "Yes, I
suppose I did.· She blinked, looked at me. "I told you the story of
what happened at the hospital, with my friend, that night-I mean the
night it all ... "
"Yeah.· I nodded.
"There was one point when was coming doWn the third floor corridor and my friend was at the other end, trying to open one of the
doors. A young, male patient was helping her, who ... what shan I
say? Looked very much like you. I mean I was only with h'm for perhaps a minute. He was working very haTd, trying to pry back this
locked door with a piece of wood or metal-he had done something
terrible to his hands. His hands were much smaller than yours; and
the bandages had come loose from two of his fingers." She grimaced.
"But then some people needed help at the other end of the hall and
he went all with them. I'd never seen him before-well, 1 was usually in the office. More sadly, I never saw him again. But when-how
much later?-I saw you, in Teddy's, that night with your face cut, then
again, wandering around the park the next morning, barefoot, with
your shirt hanging open, the resemblance struck me immediately. For
a moment I thought you were the same person. And you'd helped us;
so I wanted to help you-" She laughed. "So you see these-" she
touched her own beads- "these really meant ... nothing."
I frowned. "You think maybe I'm ..• I was in the hospital here? That
I never came here, from somewhere else? That I've been here all the-·
"Of course not." Madame Brown looked surprised. "I said the
young man looked something like you; he had something of your carriage, especially at a distance. He was about your size and coloringmaybe even" little smaller. And I'm sure his hair was dark brown, not
black-though this was at night, by lights coming in the windows. I
think, when he went away, someone-one of the other patients1 The Anathemata: a plague journal 775 called to him by name: I don't remember what it was, now." Her hands fell to her lap. "But that, anyway, is the real reason I offered you the job. I don't know why, but I thought it might be a good time to clear that up." "I haven' talways been here," I said. "I came here, over the bridge, over the river. And soon I'm going to leave. With Lanya and Denny ... " It had felt very important to say. "Of cou18e,' Madame Brown said; but looked puzzled. "We all have to go on from where We are. And·of course we've all come from where we've been. Certainly, al some point, you must have come here. More important, though, is not to get trapped in some circle of your own, ha- bitual-" Outside, the dog barked. "Oh, that must be my next patient," Madame Brown interrupted herself. The dog barked, kept barking. Madame Brown frowned, half rose from the chair, one hand again absently at her beads. "Muriell" she called; her voice was loud and low. "Muriel!t1 It must have been something in the juxtaposition: the chains of lenses and prisms, or perhaps that she had said the beads meant noth- ing convinced me I was about to learn their real meaning; not that I was the person in the hospital but that somehow I or he ... or that way she caned the dog made to remember some place or some time when she, or someone else, had called it; not even my name, but pOSSibly some other, if I could recall it-each element seemed about to explain the others, clearing the pattern; and that scratch ... I got chills. I was being nudged, pushed, about to be reminded of .•• what? Anything more than the vast abysms of all our ;gnorances? Whatev- er, it was vastly sinister and breathlessly freeing. But I did not know; and that mystic ignorance wrung me out with gooseflesh. "Well," Madame Brown was saying. "Our time is about up. And I'm pretty sure that's my next patient. • ·Okay." I felt relieved too, somehow. "Hey, thanks a lat." "Would you like to arrange another-" "No. Thanks, no, I don't want to come back." "All right." She stood up and considered saying something: Which, I guess, was: "Kid, please don't think I'm smug. About you, or about my of the things we've talked about. I may not understand. But it's not from not caring.· I smiled. The gooseResh rolled on- "I don't think you're smug-" and rolled away. "But 1 knew 1 wasn't going to come here more than once-as a patient. So I had to get something for my troubles. I've
776 Dhalgren
spent a lot of time in therapy. And you have to know how to use it."
llaughed.
She smiled. "Good.'
"I'll see you next time Lmya has Denny and me over for dinnerif not before. So long. Hey, if you want to talk about any of this with
Lmya, go ahead."
"Oh, I wouldn't-"
"If she asks you anything, tell her what you think. Please."
She pressed her lips a moment. 'All right. Then it probably will
provide us with at least thirty-six houTs solid conversation.' She
opened the doorfor me. "So long. I'll see ... Oh, hello ... I'll be with
you in a rew moments."
·Sure.· The guy sitting on the desk corner, smiling up from the
Newboy volumes, was the long-haired kid I'd seen cross-legged the
night in the book-store basement, doing Om.
Madame Brown went in her office and closed the door.
I went to the desk and picked up three of the books beside him.
"I'm stealing these. r.ll Madame Brown lJinya'll bring them back if
she really wants them ... ' I was going to say more, but eveR that
sounded silly.
"Sure. I'R tell Dr Brown as soon as I go in." Which made me wonder what he thought about me calling her "Madame." I went into the
hall. As I passed Muriel, sitting on the top stePl watching me with gentled eyes, I heard the olIice door open.
I wrote all this down because today the page with the list of names
on it is missing from the notebook. When I got back to the nest from
the sesSion, I started brOWSing through and I couldn't find it. How
many times have I read it over? 1 was planning to make myselfread
some of the Newboy. But as soon as I realized that page was gone, I
suddenly felt an obsession to read it again, and began searching
through the entries again and again on the chance 1 might have overlooked it. How many times have I read it before? (And noW the only
name I can remember from itis William Dhalgren.) At last, just to pull
my mind away from it, I started writing Out the above (and truncated) account of the hour tanya arranged for me to have with Madame
Brown, while she was off at her school. And what does it get mel The
writing it down, I mean?
in their hands; the optic chain (a hundred feet? two hundred feet of
it?), stretched among a dozen as they danced, glittered in beast light,
The Anathemata: a plague journal 777
sending flaked reflections along the undersides of leaves. Around us,
they howled into the night, delighted, some going near the brazier,
some going away.
Copperllead scrubbed at his mouth with his wrist. His eyes looked
very red, his whole face burnished and flickering. "Hey; bow do you like
that?" he said. "Protection! That bastard Calkins wanted God-damn
protection!' He turned from me to Glass. I laughed. Clapping perforated it. Copperhead looked up, suddenly; began to bellow and clap too,
his palms hollowed. He was off rhythm so it carried a long way. He kept
on bobbing his head to Glasss bobbing head, till finally he got it,though
he was laughiRg, noW. Dragon lJidy, beyond the toppled furnace, one
boot propped on a fallen cinderblock, kneaded her shoulder, pensive
and intent, watching the dance, her jade beast momentarily out.
lJinya turned and jumped, her blue shirt mapped with sweat; she
held a chain high with one hand. She moved her harmonica across
her mouth with the other, blOwing discord after discord. Her forehead
was glazed, her hair wet down her brow.
Jommy, I guess it was, broke out between Mildred and same bird
of paradise (Cathedral shouting, "Hey, wat<:h it-"), staggering into
the dazzling web, and grabbed a stJand for balance. Denny\; end-l
jumped-broke (between mirror and prism) but he just whirled the
loose length; finally looped it around somebody else\; s[rand and held
it high with both hands. An end someone else had dropped snaked
and jerked through fire-lit grass. I stepped forward, grabbed it up,
and dodged beneath it, jumping from foot to foot and bellOWing. Dt and Spider and Raven and Cathedra! and Tarzan (he really can
dance good as the niggers) and Jack the Ripper and Filament and
Angel made a web: one strand vibrated; another went slack in catenaries between taut lengthS. Gladis paused, with a fist full of green
cloth over her great belly, swaying and breathing with her mauch
wide. She ducked from a strand that tightened against her cheek,
swung away, and began. to clap.
I stopped shouting soon because my throat hurt; and heard, between
the claps: "Bunny, whyn't you get in there and show 'em how itS done!'
"Don't be silly, dear! We'll just watch .•
"Naw; come on! I ain't nevtrre.ally seen you dance."
"Smile when you say that. Why don't you?"
"AW; come on. I wanna see what you can do."
Something inche fire exploded; sparks shot above the !lame tips,
showering. The myriad narrow parabolas extinguished,
778 Dha!gren
Dollar, his pimply back bright with sweat, stood centered in the
clearing, feet wide, knees and head bent. Each clap detonated something in his belly that flung his hands, hips, and shoulders about.
Some of the commune kids were naked.
John danced with his braWl> beard up, his blond hair back, and his
brass orchid waving on his hand overhead. A girl had gotten her legs
caught in the chain going around, and fallen; she sat a long time, head
forward, hair the color of dry leaves down across one breast A few times
she tried to stand. But another length of chain feU on her shoulder when
someone dropped another end; she seemed too weighted to rise.
A griffin fliickered twice: Adam bobbed and jerked. Chains and
shocked hair swung and clattered and went out behind the reeling
beast.
Bunny. barking shrill as a lap-dog, a dozen strands caught among
up-thrust fingers, suddenly pranced forward, shaking back silver hair.
Pepper, haunched behind hip>, fallowed, clapping and grinning like
the devil.
An elderly black wOman who'd brought some of the supper-boxes,
stonily silent till now, cackled, beginning to clap too. The heavy, blackhaired man with the bamboo fiute had finally gotten out of his pants
and danced up to her,trying to bring her into the eircle. He piped and
bobbed and bounced around: it was pretty phony and for a second 1
thought she would pinch his crank. But she got into it anyway and
clapped for himAnd 1 stopped, landing on both heels, jarred to the scalp.
1 turned in the furor, looking for someone (Thinking: Where did it
Come from ..• ? Why now ... ? What ... ? then throwiog that away
and just trying to hold on to it); lanya, shirt open and flapping, breasts
shaking, eyes closed under quivering lids, turned to me behind at least
five chains. 1 reached through them and caught her shoulders.
Her eyes snapped wide.
"Michael ...• 1 said.
A chain pulled down across my arm; a prism nipped my wrist. u.dy
of Spain was at one end, hauling.
"Mike Henry ... " I looked down between my elbows at the trampled grass. "Micbael Henry .•. ?"
One of her bare feet moved. "Whats that?"
Very Slowly, 1 said: "My first name is Mike ... Michael. My middle
name is Henry." 1 looked up. "My last name-Fl ... ? Fr ... ?"
The Anathemata: a plague journal 779
u.nya narrowed her eyes. Then she grabbed my forearm with the
same hand her harmonica was in.
The edge bit; which brought me back: "What did 1 say?"
But she was looking around us, among the others. "Denny!"
"lanya. what did 1 say?"
Her eyes snapped back to mine. She had a funny smile, intense and
scared. "You said your first name was-" around us they clapped-
"Michael. Your second name-" they clapped again- "is Henry. And
your last ... ?"
My jaw clamped so hard my head shook. "I ... 1 had it for a second! but then 1 ...•
"It begins with 'E" She called again: "Denny!"
"Wait a minute! Wait, I ... no, I canlt remember! But the first
name-U
"-Michael Henry ... " she prompted.
Denny ran up. "What ... ? he put a hand On her shoulder, a hand
on mine. "Come on. you wanna-n
"Tell him, Kid!"
1 dropped u.nya's elbows and took both of Dennys.
He was breathing very hard. "My name is Michael-" another
clap- "Henry ... something. 1 don't remember the last one now." 1
took a deep breath (clap!). "But two out of three is pretty good!' I
must have been grinning pretty hard. .
"Wow!" Denny said. He slarted to say a couple of other things, but
finally just shrugged, grinning back.
"I don't know what to say either, h I said.
u.nya hugged me. She almost knocked me over.
Denny hugged us both, getting his head between ours and wiggling
it back and forth and laughing. So u.nya had to hold him up with one
hand. We all staggered. I put my arm around him too. Somebody
pulled a chain against my back. It either broke or One of the people
holding it let go. We staggered again.
Someone put hands against my back and said: "Hey. watch it! Don't
faU!" Paul Fenster-l hadn't even seen him among the spectatorswas steadying me as we came apart.
u.nya said: "It's all right if we fall, Paul. It's okay.»
Someone threw
another length of
chain into the eircleo Mantichore and
Re·reading this single description of Paul
Fenster between these soiled cardboards. this
thought: Since life may end at any when. the
expectatioA of revelation or peripity, if not
780 Dhalgnm
iguanadon caught it
up, blundering together, casting ghostlights. Clap!
"Hey, I like your
school,» Denny said.
"I've been helping
l1Inya with her kids.»
"I was telling you
about Denny, Paul?
He was the one who
suggested we take
class trip that
turned out so well. "
,identical to, is congruent with insanity. They
give life meaning, but expectation of them destrays our faculty for experiencing meaning. So
I am still writing out these incidents. But now I
am interested in the art of incident only as it
touches life ... but I have written that at least
three other places among these pages. What I
haven't written is that, because· of it, I· am less
and less interested in the incidence of art.
("Sex without guilt?" Entelechy without anticipationl) I just wonder would Paul have done
anything differently that evening in the park if
he'd known he was going to be shot in the
head and neck four times, six hours later.
I said: "I've never seen any children there. I've heard their voices.
Onrhe tape recorder. But I don't believe you ever had any real children in there. n
l1Inya looked at me oddly.
Fenster laughed. "Well, you brought us five of them yourself. "
"But there weren't any ... " Inside, it felt like two disjoined surfaces had suddenly slipped flush; the relief was unbearable. "I put five
of them ... in the scbool?"
"Woodard, Rose, Sammy ... ?" l1Inya said.
"You remember." Denny said. "Stevie? Marceline?lI
"1 remember] n I said. "'I know who I am ... »
"Michael Henry," Denny said.
I put my hand on Fenster's shoulder. "You go dance."
"Naw; I'm not into the bare-ass bit. n
I frowned at the dancers; only fifteen or twenty were naked.
"Go on." I pushed at him; he stepped back. "You don't have to take
your clothes olf. You just go dance."
Fenster looked at Lanya. To stand up for him? I flashed on him
pulling her shirt closed across her breasts, buttoning the top button,
patting her head, and walking away.
qGo ahead." I was angry. "Dance!1lo
"Come on, Kid," l1Inya said, taking my arm.
Fenster walked off now, laughing.
"You wanna sit down?" Denny asked.
"Came on." l1Inya said. "Let's go sit down,"
Denny took my other arm; but I twisted to look back.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 781
Fenster walked between the dancers, now pushed, now helping a
girl wearing just a sopping T-shirt who fell against him, now ducking
beneath one of tbe glittering lines pulled between bright creatures
prancing at the tree.
"What are Y011 trying to do?" l1Inya asked.
"Take off my clothes. I don't need anything ... anything now." I
tossed my boot on top of my vest. I lifted my chin and raised the seven
chains and the projector. Links dragged my nipples. I held them up,
swaying, and let go. Some hit my nose and cheek and ear. Some fell
across my shoulder, and slid off, clattering, to the grass. I looked down
to undo the twin hooks on my belt; pushed down my pants. Lanya
held my arm so I wouldn't fall gening my foot out the cuff.
"Feel better?" Denny asked.
I tried to undo the clasp at the side of my neck. A fHe of insects, it
felt like, charged down my belly, caught in the hair of my groin. The
optic chain sagged around my ankle.
"I think you broke it," l1Inya said.
"I can fix it again," Denny said. "I got nails-"
"No/' I said.
From the commune, from the nest, and from the people who'd just
come to watch, they clapped and leaped beside the fire. Seven more,
barking, calling, and yipping, broke from the loose ring, turned
among and beneath (one very black girl jumped over) the beaded
chain that crossed and crossed the clearing. The heads of beasts blown
out of light like glass broke scarves of smoke; our throats tickled from
the harsh air.
Three silhouetted figures, heads together, came toward me, whispering. Copperhead, center, conferred with Raven and Cathedral.
Raven and Copperhead were naked. (The different curl and color of
their hair, suddenly bright at the sides of their heads with the fire behind them ... ) Copperhead had his hand on Raven's sboulder.
Copperhead was saying: "P.otection! Did you get that? Calkins asking for protection-?"
Cathedral said: "Scorpions don't prOtect nothing."
Copperhead said: "They shot out practicall.y every God-damn window in the God-damn fucking building. Man, it was something!"
Raven asked: "They shot up Calkins'S place? The sniper ... ?"
Copperhead said: "Not Calkins' place! And it weren't no fuckin'
sniper! It was them people back at that big store. You remember that
big fuckin' apartment house Thirteen used to be in, up on the six-
782 Dha!gren
teenth floor? God damn, man, they shot the whole fuckin' place up,
practically every God-damn window in the building!"
"Shit, manl" Cathedral shook his heade "The honkeys is bad as the
niggers,n
Copperhead humphed: "Protection!"
Raven laughed.
They walked away in the dark.
1 watched the fire. One pants leg was still around my ankle. The
optic chain, as 1 swayed, swayed against my calf. "I want to ... to
dance . .n
"Then get your foot out your pants cuff," Denny said. "You'll trip
yourself." He sounded like he didn't want me to go, though.
Each Clap! struck something inside my skull that made a flash all
its own. My ears thundered as though only inches from the drum.
Each explosioR left some crazy echo stuttering in the tattered noise. 1
stepped forward, moiling my genitals in my hand. They felt sensitive.
I stepped again.
"Watchit-"
Lanya must have held my pants leg down with her foot, because
they came all. 1 stumbled, but kept going. Toward the dance.
In a black turtleneck sweater he stood, with folded arms, among
the spectators. He didn't see me looking at him. But Lady of Spain and
D-t and a couple ,of others did and stopped dancing. Prisms and lenses hung down from my neck. Mirrors and prisms swung from my
wrist. Lenses and mirrors dragged from my ankle behind me in the
grass.
He shifted a little. Firelight shook its patina across his brown hair.
"Hey ... '" 1 said lOUdly. "I know who 1 ... who 1 am now. Who
are yoU?D
He looked at me, frowning.
"Who are you?" 1 repeated. "Tell me. 1 know who I am!" A few
more daRcers stopped to listen. But the clapping was still awfully loud.
!shook my head. "Almost. .. "
"Kid?" he asked; it had taken him until then to recognize me,
naked. "Hey, Kid! How'te you doing?"
It was the man whOld interviewed me at Calkins' party.
"No," 1 said. "I know who I am. You say who you are."
"William . . • " he began. "Bill •.. ?" And then: 'You don't rememberrne?n
The Anathemata: a plague journal 783
"I remember you. 1 just want to know who you are!"
"B'll," he repeated. And nodded, smiling.
Two people who'd stopped'to listen began to clap again.
"I know that," 1 said. "1 remember that. What's your last name?"
He raised his head a little. His smile-a dragon, bobbing by, stained
his {ace a momentary green-tightened: "You tell me yours, I'll tell you
mine." His mouth stayed a little open, waiting for a laugh to come out.
But the laugh catne from me. William ..• ? 1 shouted: "1 know who
you arel" and doubled with hysteria. "I know . .. !"
"Hey, Kid? Come on now ... " Lanya-she and Denny had followed
me-took my arm again. 1 tried to pull away, stumbled intO ,the dancers'
chains, and turned, flailiBg my own. But she held on; Denny had me
too. t yanked once more and fell against a guy I didn't know who cried,
"Owwww!" and hugged me, laughiBg. I turned in a shield's glare, bright
blind a moment, and moments after images pulsed everywhere.
"Come on, man," Denny kept saying, pulling at my forearm.
"Watch aBd held up a strand of chain so 1 could get nnder.
"That's right," Lanya said. "This way ... "
1 got dizzy and nearly fell. Fire and branches wheeled on a black
sky. 1 came up against bark and turned my back to it:
"But 1 know what his name is! It has to be. He couldn't be anybody
else!' I kept telling them, then breaking 011 into a giggle which, when
I let it go, twisted my face in a grin so huge my jaw muscles hurt and
1 had to rub them with the heels of my palms. "That's got to be who
he is! You understand why, don't you? I meaB you do understand?"
They didn',t,
But, for a while, 1 did.
And, bursting with my new knowledge, 1 danced.
I've never had more fun.
Then I catne back and sat with them.
Denny's hand was on my knee; Lanya's shoulder was against my
shoulder, her arm along my arm. We sat on the roOts, teB feet from
the high, forking fire, watching the men and women jog and jump to
the sounds of their own bodies, one arched and beating the backs of
his thighs, one spinning slowly, and shouting loudly, each time her
short hair brushed by the sagging branch. Somebody danced with his
belt loose and swinging. And somebody else was taking off her jeans.
Bill, arms folded across his black sweater, among the other watchers, watched.
784 Dhalgren
1 sat and panted and smiled (sweat dribbling the small of my back)
with contentment over the absolute fact of his revealed identity, till
even that, as all absolutes must, began lis dissolve.
"What-?" Denny moved his hand on my leg.
Lanya glanced at me, shifted her shoulder against mine.
But I sat back again, sHent, marveJmg the dissolve's completion,
both dated and numbed by the jarring claps that measured and
metronomed each differential in the change-till 1 had no more certainty of BHYs last name than I had of my own. With only the memory of knowledge, and bewilderment at whatever mechanic had, for
minutes, made that knowledge as certain to me as my own existence,
I sat, trying to sort that mechanism's failure, which had let it slip away.
Dragon Lady; with her boot, shoved in another part of the furnace's
cinderblock wan, then turned to add her raucous contention to the argument behind her ..
"You know," Lanya said, '!S somebody flung a burning brand ,that
landed on the edge of the dish, flame end on the grass, "this place isn't
going to be here tomorrow.·
"That's all right," Denny said.
Lanya pushed hack against me harder, drew up her knees to hug.
The dance was all around us. The hattered grass was ,tangled with
chains, plain and jeweled. Most of the scorpions blazed up, incendiarup to bring the brandy; that afternoon, to Tak's place-I apologized
about opening one of the bottles-he really looked surprised.
He came out of the shed doorway onto the roof, scratching his chest
and his chin and still half asleep. But saying he was glad to see us.
Denny climbed onto the balustrade to walk, hands out for balance,
along the roof's edge. Lanya kept running up and gOing, "Boo!· at him
as though she were trying to make him fan off. I thought it was funny;
but Tok said please stop it hecause it was eight stories down and scaring him into a stomach ache.
So they came back to the shack.
Denny went inside: "Look what Tak's got on the wall!·
Thought he meant George, but it was the interview with me from
Calkins' party in the Times. Tak had stapled it to the wall just inside
the door. The edges were yellow.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 785
"I keep that there," Tak said, "for inspiration. 1 Sort of like it. Glad
to see, after all this, the papers says you're having another book.·
"Yeah," 1 said. "Sure. Thanks.' 1 really didn't want to talk about it.
It got across, because he was looking at me a litde sideways. But Tak
is good at picking up on things like that.
Around us, the sky was dose as crumpled lead. The first stanchion
of the bridge was just visible through it, like a Single wing of some dim
bird that might, in a moment, fly anywhere.
Tak pulled the cork out of the open botde. "Come on. Lets have a
drink.· He squatted, his back against the shack wall. We sat next to
him. Denny took a swallow, screwed up his face, and from then on just
passed it between Lanya and me.
"Tak,' I said, "could you tell me something?' 1 asked him about
the bubbles around the inside of the glasses. "I thought it might have
something to do with the water pressure for the ciry. Maybe it's going
down and that causes the ring to start higher?"
"I think," Tak said
to the green-glass
neck! "it has more to
do with who washes
your dishes. You're
washing out a glass,
see, and you run
your fiuger around
the inside to get off
the crud, and it
leaves this thin coating. But your finger
doesn't reach the
bottom. Later you
put water in the
glass, and the air
comes Qut of solution to form bubbles.
But the bubbles need
something to nucleate on. So the imperfections in the glass
h",re any longer.
Curiosity took me, alone.
A bed had been overturned against the
door but fell back clattering' as soon as I
pushed it
They'd put bars up on the ground
Iloor windows, but the panes were mostly
smashed, and, in the one remaining, I found
three of those tiny, multi-haloed holes you get
from bullets. There were a couple of sleeping
bags still around. Some nice stuff was up on
the walls from where they had the place decorated: and a big, almost lile·size lion wedged
together out of scrap car-parts and junked
iton. An acetylene bomb and nozzle leaned in
the corner. (" I wonder what happened to the
woman who was making that. She was
Eurasian, " Lanya said when I told her about it,
later. "She was a pretty incredible person; I
mean even besides building that thing. ") The
walls of two rooms were charred black. I saw
a place where a poster had been burned away.
another place, where a quarter of one
was left: George in, the night wilderness. Upstairs t guess most of the rooms had never
had doors. It was a wreck. Great pieces of
786 Dhalgrert
and the crud left
above the grease line
are easier to nucleate
on; sO you get this
definite cuto£[-"
uYou mean, II I
said, "the dishwasher
sticks his finger Jess
and less far dawn
the glass every day?"
Tak laughed and
nodded "Aren't you
glad you know same
one with some idea
of technology? Rising water tables, lowering presS11re. You
could get paranoid
over stuff like that if
you don't know
what you're doing."
"Yeah," and I took
the bottle and drank.
plaster had been tugged off the walls. Once I
heard what I thought was moaning, but when
. I rushed into the smashed up room-tools
were scattered all over the floor, screwdrivers,
hails, pliers, wrenches-it wasn't a creaking
shutter or anything. I' don't know what it was.
Bolted to the wa ll was a plank on, which they
had carved their initials" names, phrases, some
written in fancy combinations of colored
magic markers, others scrawled in plank pentel. Near the bottom, cut clearly with some
small' blade: JuneR, Lanya says she'll have to
find some abandoned drugstore or someplace
to get birth control pills now, in the next three
months, Denny is worried about his little girlfriend. He says she was sick the last time he
was over there, " ... with a fever, man. And
every thing. She wouldn't hardly move, under
the blankets." No one atthe commune, or the
bar, or the church-neither George nor Reverend Amy-know where they all went or
even, what really happened. But if someone
would do that to the House, I just wonder
about the nest. Was the blond girl they described June? I guess I hope so.
And over the next fifteen seconds, the afternoon sky, dull as an aluminum pot bottom, da·rkened to full night.
Five seconds into the darkening, Denny said, "Jesus, what-?" and
stood up.
There was a noise like a plane coming. It kept coming 100, whUe I
watched Dennys features go night blue_
Lanya grabbed my arm,and I turned to see her blue face, and all
around it, go black.
If it was a plane, it was going to crash into us.
I jerked my head around left and right and up (hit the back of my
head an the wall) and down, trying to see.
Another sound, under the roar, beside me: Tak standing?
Something wet my hand on ,the tar-paper beside me. He must have
kicked OVer the brandy.
White light suddenly blotched the horizon, cut by the silhouette of
a water tower.
•
The Anathemata: a plague journal 787
I didn't feel scared, but my heart was beating so slow and hard my
chin jerked, each thump.
Ught wound up the sky.
I could just see Tak standing now, beside me. His shadow sharpened an the tar-paper wall.
The sound ... curdled!
The light split. Each arm zigged and zagged, separate, ragged-edged
and magnesium bright. The right arm split again. The left One was almost directly above us.
And Tak had no shadow at all, I stood up, helped Lanya to ...
Some of the light flickered out. More came. And more.
"But what is ... ?" she whispered right at my ear, pointing. From
the horizon, another light ribboned, ragged, across the sky.
"Is it. , , lightning?" Denny shouted.
"It looks like lightning!" Tak shouted back.
Someone else said: "'Cause George don't shine that bright!"
Tak's bleached face twisted as if beat by rain. The air was dry. Then
I noticed how cool it waS.
Nodes in the discharge were too bright to look at. Clouds-sable,
Iead,or steel-mounded about the sky, making canyons, cliffs,
ravines; for lightning it was too slow, too wide, too big!
Was that thunder? It roared like a jet squadron buzzing the city,
and sometimes one would crash or something, and Lanyas face would
Here one page, possibly two, is missing.
Don't remember who had the idea, but during
the aftercation, for a while II argued: "But what
about Madame Brown? Besides, I like it here.
What are We going to do when you're at
school? Your bed's okay for a night, but we
can't sleep there that long. "
L.anya, after answering these sanely, said:
"Look, tty it. Denny wants to come. The nest
can get along without you for a few days,
Maybe it'll do your writing some good,' Then
she picked up the paper that had fallen behind the Harley, climbed over it, -came out
from under the loft, tip-toed with
herhead up
and kissed me. And put the paper in her
blouse pocket-bending over, it had pulled
out all around her jeans.
as loud as I could:
"Lanya! Dennyl" If
they answered, I
conldn't hear; and I
was hoarse from
shouting. The street
sign chattered in its
holder-the wind
had grown that
strong,
I took another
half do.en steps, my
bare faa t on the
788 Dhalgren
I pushed myself to the loft edge, swung. my
legs over, and dropped. '"Okay."
So Denny and I spent what I call three days
and she calls one ("You came in the evening,
spent the night and the next day, then left the
following morning! That's one full day, with
tag ends. " NThat should at least count for
two,' I said. nit seemed like a long time •.. ")
which wasn't so bad but _ .• I don't know.
The first night Madame Brown put supper
together out of cans with Denny saying all
through: "You wanna 'let me do something
... ? Are you sure I can't donothin' ... ? Here,
1'.11 do ..• '" and finally did wash some pans and
dishes.
I asked, "What are you making?" but they
didn't hear so I sat in the chair by the table alternately tapping the chair-back on the wall
and the front legs on the floor; and drank two
glasses of wine.
lonya came in and asked why I was so qUiet.
I said: "Mulling."
"On a poem?'" Madame Brown asked.
We ate. After dinner we all sat around and
drank more, me a little more than the others,
but Madame Brown and I· actually talked
about some things: her work, what wet:1t on in,
a scorpion run ("You make it sound so healthy,
I mean like a class trip, I'm not so sure that I
like the idea as much now. It sounded very exciting before you told me anything about it. "),
the problems of doctors in the city, George. I
like her. And she's smart as hell,
Back in Lanya's,room, I sat at the desk in the
bay window, looking at my notebook. Lanya
and Denny went to bed ("No, the light won't
bother USN), and after about fifteen minutes, I
joined them and we made cramped, languorous
love which had this odd, let's·take·turns thing
about it; but it was a trip, I nearly knocked over
the big plant pot by the bed four times,
I woke before the window had lightened,
got up and prowled the house. In the kitchen,
considered getting drunk. Made myself a cup
of instant coffee instead, drank half, and
prowled some more, Looked back into Lanya's
curb, my boot in the
gutter, Dust fits hit
my face. My shadow
staggered around
me on the pavement, sharpening,
blurriog, tripling.
People were COmiog down the street,
while the darkness
flared behiod ,them.
That slow, crazy
lightning rolled underthe sky
The group milled
,towaTd me; some
dodged forward.
One front figure
supported another,
who seemed hurt. I
got it in my head it
was the commune:
John and Mildred
leading, and somethiog had happened
to John. A brightening
among the cloudsThey were thirty
feet nearer than I'd
thought:
George looking
around at the sky,
big lips a wet cave
around his teeth's
glimmer, his pupils
under-ringed with
white, and glare flaking onhiswet, veined
temples, supporting
The Anathemata: a plague journal 789
room: Denny was asleep against the wall,
Lanya was on her back, eyes opened, She
smiled at me,
I was naked.
U Restless?R
"Yeah." ·1 came over, squatted by the bed,
hugged her.
uGQ ahead. Pace some more. I need another couple of hours." She turned over, I
took up the old notebook here, sat around
cross-legged on the floor, contemplating writing' down what had happened till then.
Orapoem .
lOid neither.
Looked in the top desk drawer-the wood
looks like paper had been glued all over it and
then as much pulled off as possible. She said
some friends lugged it from a burned·out windshield warehouse a few blocks down the hill.
I took out the poems she'd saved, spread
them on the gritty wood, on every kind of
paper, creased this way and that (red-tufted begonia stalks doffed), and tried to read them.
Couldn't.
Thought seriously of tearing them up.
Didn't.
But understood much about peo
ple who have.
Looked back at Lanya; bare shoulders, the
back of her neck, a fist sticking from under the·
pillow.
Prowled Some more.
Got back into bed.
Denny jerked his head up, blinking. He
didn't know where he was, 1 rubbed the back
of his. neck and whispered, "It's okay, boy. , ."
He settled back down, nuzzling into Lanya's
armpit. She turned away from him toward me.
I woke alone.
Leaves arched over me. I looked up
through them. Blew once to see if they'd
move, but they were too far. Closed my eyes.
"Hey," Denny said. nyou still asleep?"
I opened my eyes. "Fuck you if I was."
"1 just walked Lanya over to· school." He
leaned against the edge of the doorway, holding his chains. 1I!1t's nice around here, huh?"
Reverend Taylor;
she leaned forward
(cryiog? laughing?
cringiog from the
light? sean:hing the
ground?), her hair
rough as shale, her
knuckles and the
backs of her nails
darker than the skio
between.
ThefrecIded, brickhaired Negress, among
darker faces, walked
behind with
the blind-mute; and
the blond Mexican.
Someone was
shouting, among others shouting: 'You
hear them planes?
You hear all them
planes?" (It couldn't
have been planes.)
"Them planes are
awfully low! They
gonna crash! You
hear-" at which
point the buildiog
face across the. street
cracked, .all up and
down, and beHied
out so slow I wondered how. Cornices, copimg stones,
wiodow frames, glass
and brick hurIed
across the street.
they screamed-
790 DhalgT1ll1
I sat up on the side ofthe bed.
",But there ain't too much to do ... it's nice
of her to have us over here, I mean to stay a
while, huh?"
I nodded.
About two hours later he told me he Was
going out. I spentthe rest ofthe morning staring at blank paper-or prowling.
Madame Brown, coming out of her office,
saw me ,once and said: IIyou look strange. Is
anything the matter?"
"No."
"Are you just bored?"
"No/' I said. "I'm not bored at all. I'm
thinking a lot."
"Can you leave off long enough for a lunch
break?"
"Sure." I; hadn't had breakfast.
Tuna fish salad.
Canned pears.
We both had a couple of glasses of wine.
She asked me for my character impressions of:
Tak, Lanya, Denny, one of her patients I had
met at the bar once; I told her and she thought
what I said was interesting; told me hers,
which I thought were interesting too, and they
changed mine; so I told her the changes. Then
the next patient came by and I went back to
staring at my paper; prowling; staring.
Which is what 'I was doing when Lanya and
Denny Came in. He'd gone back to the school
to help out with the class.
"Denny suggested we go on a class trip,
outside to at the city. We did. It turned
out to be a fine idea. With two of us we didn't
have any problem handling them. That waS a
good idea. Denny. It really was." Then she
asked if I'd written anything.
"Nope."
'You look strange," she told me.
Denny said: "No he don't. He just gets like
that sometimes."
Lanya Mmmmed. She knows me better
than he does, I guess.
Denny waS really into being useful-a trait
which, pleasant as he is, "'ve never seen in him
before. I helped them do a couple of things for
Madame Brown: explore the cellar, take one
I could hear it over
the explosion because SOme were
right around meand ran against the
near wall, taking me
with them and I
crashed into the
pe.ople in front of
me, wind knocked
out of me by the people behind, screaming; someone reached
over my shoulder
for support, right by
my ear, and nearly
tore it off. More
people (or something?) hit the people behind me, hard.
Coughing and
scrambling, I turned to push someone
from behind me.
Across the street,
girders, scabby with
brick and plaster,
losseHated luminous
dust. I staggered from
the waH among the
staggering crowd and
stumbled into a big
woman on her hands
and knees, shaking
her head.
I tried to pull her
up, but she got back
down on her knees
again.
What she was tryThe Anathemata: a plague journal 791 chair down, bring up a dresser she'd found on the street and managed to get to the back door. It was a nice evening. I wondered if I was spoiling it by suggesting: "Maybe we should go back to the nest tonight?" Lanya said: "No. You should use sOme of this boring, peace and quiet to work in." "II'm not bored," I said. And resolved to sit in front of a piece of paper for at least an hour. Which I did: wrote nothing. But my brain bub· bled and bobbed and rotated in my skull like a boiling egg. When I finally went to bed I fell out like an old married man. One of them or the other got up in the night to take a leak, came back to 'bea brush· ing aside the plants and we balled, hard and a little loud I think. In the morning we all got up together. I noticed Lanya noticing me being quiet. She noticed my noticing and laughed. After coffee we all walked to the school. Denny asked to stick around for the class. Now I noticed her wondering if two days in a row was a good idea. But she said, "Sure, " and I left them and went back to the house, stopping once to wonder if I should go back to the nest instead. Madame Brown and I had lunch again. "How are you enjoying your visit?" "Still thinking a lot," I told her. UBut I also think all this thinking is about to knock me out." "Your poetry?" "Haven't written a word. I guess it's just hard for ·me to write around here. II L.anya said, "You. weren't writing too much at your place, either." She said she thought there were too many people around. "1 don't think that's the reason." We talked some more. Then I came to a decision: "I'm going back to the nest. Tell tanya and Denny when they get back, will you?" "All right." She looked at me dubiously over a soup spoon puddled with Cross & Blackwell vichyssoise. "Don't you wantto wait and tell them yourself when they get back?" ing to do, I realized, was roll a pile of number ten tomato- juice and pineapple- juice cans and crum- pled cookie packages back into her over- turned shopping hag. Her black coat spread around her over crumbs of brick. One can rolled against my foot. It was empt.y. She began to go down, ,even further, laying her cheek on the pavement, reach- ing among the jan- gling cans. I bent to pull her once more. Then someone, yank- ing her from the other side, shouted, "Come on!" (Cllm ohnl thevowels, long and short, braying: the m soft as an n; the n loose as an r.) I looked up without letting go. It was George. She came up be- tween us, 'screa·m- ing: • Ahhhhhhhh- hh-Annnnnn! Don't touch mel Ahhhhhh- hhh-don't touch me, nigger!" She slag- gered and reeled in
792 Dhalgren
I poured another glass of wine. uNo. II'
When the next patient rang, I took my notebook and wandered (for five, funny mi nutes,
midway, I thought I was lost) back to the nest.
and the apes; all over the steps,
were pretty glad to $ee me. Priest, California,
and Cathedral did a great back.slapping routiM down the hall. Glass nodded, friendly but
overtly non-committal. And I had a clear
thought: 1ft left, Glass, not Copperhead, would
become leader.
I climbed up into the loft, told Devastation's
friend Mike to move his ass the hell over.
'Oh, yeah, Kid. Sure, I'm sorry. 1',11 get
down-"
"You can stay, " I said. II Just move over."
Then I stretched out with my notebook under
my shoulder and fell asleep, splat!
Woke up ,logy but clutching for my pen,
TOok some blue paper to the back steps, put
the pine plank across my knees and wrote and
wrote and wrote.
Went back into the kitchen for some water.
Lanya and Denny were there.
If Hi:'
"Oh, hi-"
Went back to the porch and wrote $ome
more. Finally it WaS
aur grip. I didn't see
her look at either of
us. "Ahhhhh-l saw
what you done!-
that poor little
white girl what
couldn't do no thin'
against you! We saw
it! We all saw it!
She come lookin' for
you, askin' aU around, askin' everybody where you are
aU the time, and
nOw you take her,
take her like that,
just take her like
you done! And see
what's happened!
Now, see! Oh, God,
oh help me, don't
touch me, oh. God!"
U,Aw, come on!"
George shouted again as Once more
she started to collapse. He pulled again; she came loose from my gri p.
The coat stung my hands. As I dodged away. she was sdU shrieking:
"Them white people gonna get you, nigger! Them white men
ganna kill us all 'cause of what you dane today to that poor little
white girl! You done smashed up the store windows, broke aU the
streetlights, climbed up and pulled the hands down from the clock!
You been rapin' and !oodn' and all them things! Oh, God, there's
gonna be shoo tin' and burnin' and blood shed all over! They gonna
shoot up everything inlackson. Oh, God, oh, God, don't touch
met"
"Will you shut up, woman, and pick up your damn junk, n George
said.
Which, when I looked back, seconds later, was what she was doing.
George, ten feet off, squatted to haul up a slab of rubble that rained
plaster from both sides, whlleanother woman tugged .. ! a figure strugThe Anath""!ata: a plague journal 793 gling beneath. A handful of gravel hit my shoulder from somewhere and I ducked forward. Ahead of me, turning and turning in the silvered wreckage, Rev- erend Amy sqUinted up, fists moving above her ears, till her fingers jerked wide; the up-tilted face was sco .. d with what I thought rage; but it swung again and I saw that the expression struggling with her features was nearer ecstasy. I climbed over faHen brick. The orchid rolled and bouaced on my belly. . The blind-mute was sitting on the curb near the hydrant. The blond Mexican and the brick-haired Negress squatted on either side. She held his hand, pressing her fist, the fingers rearranged and re- arranged, at each contact, against his palm. I reached among my chains, found the projector ball, and fingered the bottom pip. The disk of blue light slid up the rubbly curb as I stepped to the sidewalk. They looked up, two with eyes scarlet as blood-bubbles. The mute's sockets (he poked his head about) were like empty cups dregged with shadow. There was a sudden stinging in my throat from the smoke; smoke blew away. I shouted: "What are you doing?" The Mexican dragged his boots back against the curb. The woman put her other hand on the mute's shoulder. I watched their movements of surprise. Translated to their hands on the blind-mute's arms, it gave him his only knowledge of me. His face tilted forward; his hand closed on the woman's-my knowledge of what he knew. Thinking: It takes so little information ... though I am cased in light and their ,eyes orbited with plaslic, in the over- determined matrix, translated and translated, perhaps his knowledge of me is even more complete. I was frightened of their red eyes? What does my blue beast become behind scarlet caps! People shouted. I shouted louder: 'What's going on? What's happening? Do you know?" and ended coughing in more smoke. The Negress shook her head, a hand before her mouth, hesitant to quiet me, pinch her own lips close, or push me away. "Somebody put a bomb in ... Didn't they? Isn't that what they said? Sornebody put a-"
794 Dhalgren
"No!" the Mexican said loudly. He tugged the blind-muteS shoulders. "There wasn't any-anything like that ... " He got the blindmute on his feet.
1 turned to see men and wOmen stumbling toward me, against the
luminous mist. And something behind the mist flickered. I lurched
into the street.
"There wasn't any bomb!" the man or Ihe woman behind me
shrieked. "They shot him! From up on the roof. Some crazy white boy!
Shot him dead in the street! Oh, my God-"
Something warm splattered my ankle.
Water rolled between the humped cobbles, bright as mercury beneath the discharges on the collapsed, black sky. The street was a net
of silver and I sprinted across it, catching one woman with my shoulder who spun-shouting-her scraped face after me, almost lunged
into another man, but pushed off him with both hands; a sudden gust
of heat stung through the roofs pf my eye-sockets. Lids clamped, I got
thtough it and more dust, catching my boot-toe on something that
nearly tripped me.l coughed and staggered with the back of my hand
over my mouth.
Something went over the back of my neck, so cold I thought it was
water. But it wasjust air. Eyes tearing, my throat spasming and hacking free of the dust caught in it, 1 staggered through it a dozen steps,
till somebody grabbed me and I came up, staring at another black face.
"It's Kid!" Dragon Lady shouted to somebody and got her arm
around me to keep me from falling.
A few steps behind her Glass turned around to see me. "Huh?"
Beyond him, against a screen of slowly moiling clouds, the side
came off a twenty-story building, collapSing slowly away from the web
of steel But that must have been five blocks down.
"jesus Christ .•. !. D-t said, then glanced back at me. "Kid, you
all-?" and the sound got to us, filling up the space around us the way
a volcano must up close.
The brunt of it past, I could hear people behind me still shouting:
Three diiferent voices bawled out instructions among some fifty more
who didn't care.
"God damn it!" D-t said. "Come on!"
Someone had strewn coils of what looked like elevator cable all
over the sidewalk. It waS greasy too; so after the first dozen steps
across it, we went into the street.
And the shouting behind us had resolved to a single, distant, inThe Anathemata: a plague journal 795 sistent voice- "You wait, God damn it! You hear me, you mother- fuckers wait for me! "-getting closer- "Wait for me, God damn it! Wait ......... "!" 1 looked back. Fireball, fists pumping, bent forward from the waist and head flung back, ran full into Glass, who caught him by the arm. Fireball sagged back, gasping and crying: "You wait for me, God damn it! You damn niggers-" he sucked in a breath loud as vOmiting- "why didn't you wait!" He was barefoot, with no shirt; a half dozen chains swung and tinkled from his neck as he bent, gasping, holding his stomach. In a pulse of light 1 Saw he had a scrape down his jaw that went on across his shoulder blade as though something had fallen on him while he ran. His face was streaked with tears that he scrubbed with the flat oehis fist. "You God damn fuckin' niggers, you wait for me!D "Come OR,7I D-t said. "You all right now. n I thought Fireball was going to rail down trying to get back his breath. Somebody else sprinted up the street, out of the smoke. It was Spi- der. He looked very young, very tall, very black, and very scared. Breathing hard, he asked: "Fireball okay? I thought a damn wall fell on him." okay;" D-tsaid. "Now let:S goln Fireball nodded and lurched ahead. Glass let him go and moved beside me. His vinyl vest was hazed acroSS with powdered plaster. "Hey,' I said, "I've gOlta find lJinya and Denny. They're supposed to be going back to the nest-' "Oh, God damn, mgger!" Fireball twisted back to stare. His face was smeared filthy, and some of it was blood. "Leave them white motherfuckers alone, huh? Don't you think about nothin' except your pe.cked» "Now you just get yourself together!' Dragon lJidy pushed Fireball's shoulder sharply with the heel of her hand; when he jerked around, she took his arm like they were going for a stroH. "Let's you just cut this 'nigger' shit, huh? What you think you are, a red-headed Indian?' Glass said: "We don't got any nest; not any more." "They got any sense," D-t said, "they gonna be trying to get out too. Maybe we meet up with them at the bridge.' "What happened to the others?" I asked. "Raven, Tarzan, Cathe- dral? lJidy of Spain ... What about Baby and Adam?"
796 Dhalgren
Dragon Uidy didn't even look back.
"You were the last one,out/t D ... tsaid to Spider. "You see 'em?!!
Spider looked from D-t to me and back. "No." He looked down
where he was holding onto the end of his belt with his lanky, black
fingers, twisting a little.
"Maybe," Dragon Uidy said, letting go Fireball's arm but still not
looking back, ·we gonna meet 'em." I could tell she was frowning. "On
the bridge. Like he says." Or somethingeIse.
1 walked another five steps, looking down at the wet pavement,
feeling numbness claw at me. My fingers tingled. S? did the sales of
both feet. Then I looked up and said, "Well, God damn it, the bridge
is that way!" Which is when this incredibly loud crackling started on
our left.
We all looked up, turned· our heads, backed away all together. Spider broke, ran a dozen steps, realized we weren't coming, and turned
back to look too.
Four stories up, fire suddenly jetted firom one window. The flames
flapped up like yellow cloth under a bellows; sparks and glass tumbled down the brick.
Two more windows erupted. (1 hit my bare heel on the far curb.)
Then another-as far apart as ticks on a clock.
We ran.
Not down the way 1 said because that street was a-broil with smoke
and flickering. At the end·of another block, we turned the corner and
ran down the sloping sidewalk. There was water all over one end.
D-t and me splashed into it, watching the high brick walts, and the
billowing douds between them, shatler below our feet.
Ten yards in it was up to my knees and 1 couldn't real1y run. We
slushed on. Glass, arms swinging wide in a wildly swaying stagger,
moved ahead of me, dtagging fans of ripples from the backs ofhis soaked
pants. Then the street started sloping up. I splashed toward the edge.
What it felt like was something immense dropped into the street a
block away. Everything shook. 1 looked back at the others-Fireball
and Dragon Uidy were still splashing forward-when, in the center,
was a swell of what looked like detergent bubbles. Then steam shot
straight up. The water's edge rolled back from Fireball's dripping cuffs,
leaving his wet feet slapping the glistening pavement. .
Glass back-tracked to grab Dragon Uidy's hand, like he thought she
(or he) might fall.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 797
The geyser spit and hissed and the water bubbled into it.
We went around the next corner together.
I could see the bridge all the way to the second stanchion. Here and
there clouds had torn away from the black sky. Something was burning down between the waterfront buildings. We rushed across fifty
feet of pavement. Just before the bridge mouth, it looked like someone had grenaded the road. A slab of asphalt practically fifteen feet
high jutted up. Down the crack around it, you could see wet pipes,
and below that, flickering water. Above, that amazing, loud lightning
formed its searing nodes among the cloud canyons.
"Come on, H I said. "This way! n
Metal steps lead up to the bridge's pedestrian walk. The first half
dozen were covered with broken masonry. Glass and Dragon Lady
charged right up. Plaster dust puffed out between the railing struts.
Fireball stepped carefully on the first three steps, then grabbed both
railings and vaulted up three more. His feet were caked with junk and
he was bleeding from one ankle.
"Get gain'!" D-t crowded behind. "Get goin'!"
Spider and me went up the narrow steps practically side by side.
At the top, Spider got ahead and we ran along the clanging plates
maybe fifty yards when something ... hit the bridge!
We swayed back and forth a dozen feet! Metal ground against old
metal. Cables danced in the dark.
I grabbed the rail, staring down at the blacktop fifteen feet below,
expecting it to split over the water a hundred feet below that.
Beside me, Fireball just dropped on his knees, his cheek against the
bars. Spider put his arms around the dead lamp post, bent his head
and went, "Ahhhhhhhhh ... " like he was crying with his mouth
open-which, five seconds later, when the shaking and the creaking
died, was the only sound. Dragon Uidy swallowed, let go the rail, and
took a gasping breath.
My ears were ringing.
Everything was quiet.
jesus God," D-t whispered, "let's get off 0'-" which was when
everybody, including D-t, realized how quiet.
·Holdingthe rail tight, I turned to look back.
On the waterfront, flames flickered in smoke. A breeze came to
brush my forehead. Here and there smoke was moving off the windrunneled water. And there was nobody else on the bridge.
798 Dhalgren
"Let's go ... " I stepped around Fireball, passed by Dragon Lady.
A few seconds later, I heard Glass repeat: "Well, let's go!" Their
footsteps started.
Dragon Lady caught up. "jesus ... " she said softly beside me. But
that was all.
We kopt walking.
Girders wheeled on either side. About twenty feet beyond Ihe first
stanchion, I looked back again:
The butning city squatted on weak, inverted images of its fires.
Finally D-t touched my shoulder and made a little gesture with his
head. 50 I came on.
The double, thigh-thick suspensors swung even lower than Our
walkway; a few yards later they sloped up toward the top of the next
stanchion.
"Who is .•. ?" Glass asked soflly.
Down on the black-top, she was walking slowly toward us.
Running my hand along the raU, I watched. Then I called: "Hey, you!"
Behind me there was a flare; then another; then another. The others had flicked on their lights-which meant I was ill silhouette before a ctutch of dragons, hawks, and mantises.
She sqUinted up at us: a dark Oriental, with hair down in front of
her Shitt (like two black, inverted flames); red bandanas were stuffed
under the shoulder straps of her knapsack for padding. Her shirttails
were out of her jeans. "Huh. , . ?" She was trying ,to smile.
"You going into Bellona?"
"That's tight. " She sqUinted harder to see me. "You leaving?"
"Yeah, n I said. "You knoW; it's dangerous in therelll
5he nodded. "I'd heard they had the national guard and soldiers
and stuff posted. Hitch-hiking down, though, I didn't see anybody."
"How were the rides?:n
"All I saw was a pickup and a Willy's station wagon. The pickup
gave me a lift."
"What about traffic going out? .
She shrugged. "l guess if somebody pOS$OS you, mey'll give you a
ride. Sometimes the truckers will stop fo< a guy to spell them on driving. I mean, guys shouldn't have too tough a time. Where're you
heading?"
Over my shoulder, Glass said: "I want to get to toronto. Two of us
are heading for Alabama, though."
The Anathema/a: a plague journal 799
"I just wanted to get someplace!" Fireball said. "I don't feel tight,
you know? I ain't really felt right for two days ... !"
'You got a long way to go, either direction," she said.
I wondered what she made of the luminous light shapes that
flanked me and threw pastel shadows behind her on the gridded
black-top.
Glass asked: "Everything is still all right in Canada-?"
"-and Alabama?" asked Spider.
"Sure. Everything's all right in the rest of the country. Is anything
still happening here?"
When nobody answered, she said:
"It's just the closer you get, the funnier ... everybody acts. What's
it like inside 1"
D-t said: "Pretty rough."
The others laughed.
She laughed.
"But like you say," Dragon Lady said, "guys have a pretty easy
time," which I don't drink she got, because unless.you listen hard,
Dragon Ladys voice sounds like a marrs.
"Is there anything you can tell me? I mean that might be helpful?
Since I'm going
"Yeahl " I said. "Sometimes men'l1 come around and tear up the
place you live in. Sometimes people shoot at you from the roof-that
is, if the roof itself doesn't decide to Call on you. Or you're not the person on top oftt, doing the shooting-"
"He wrote these poems," Fireball said at my olher shoulder. "He
wrote these poems and they published them in a book and everything! They got it all over the city. But then he wrote some more, only
they came and burned them all up-" His voice shook on the fevered
lip of hysteria.
"You want a weapon," I asked, "to take in with you?"
"Wow! 11 she said. "Is it like that?"
Glass gave a short, sharp laugh.
"Yeah," I said. "We have it easy."
Spider said: "You gonna tell her about ... the Father? You gonna
tell her about june?"
"She'll learn about those."
Glass laughed again.
D-t said: "What can you say?"
800 Dhalgn:n
She ran her thumbs down her knapsack straps and settled her
weight on one hip. She wore heavy. hiking shoes, one a lot muddier
than the other. "Do I need a weapon?"
'You gonna give her that?" Dragon Dldy asked as I took my orchid
off its chain.
"We got ourselves in enough trouble with this," I said. "I don't want
it with me any more."
"Okay." Dragon Dldy said. "It's yours."
"Where you from?" Glass was asking.
"Down from Canada."
"You don't look Canadian."
not. I was just visiting.:n
·You know Albright?"
"No. You know Pern?tI
"No. You know any of the little towns around Southern Ontario?"
"No. I spent all my time around Vancouver and B.c."
"Oh," Glass said.
"Heres your weapon.' I tossed the orchid. 1t clattered on the blacktop, rolled jerkily. and stopped.
"What is-?" The sound of a Car motor made us all look toward
the end of the bridge; but it died away on some turnoff. She looked
back. "What is it?"
"How they call that?" Fireball asked.
"An orchid,' I said.
"Yeah," Fireball said. "That's what it is.'
She stooped, centered in her multiple shadows. She kept One
thumb under her pack-strap; with her other hand she picked it up.
"Put it on,J) I said.
"Are you right or left handed?" Glass asked.
"Left.' She stood, examining the flower. "At least, I write with my
left."
"Oh,"'Glass said again.
"This is a pretty vicious looking thing." She fitted it around her
wrist; something glittered there. "Just the thing for the New York subway during rush hour." She bent her neck to see how it snapped. As
her hair swung forward, under her tollar was another, bright flash.
"Ugly thing. I hope I don't need you.'
I said: "Hope you don't either.'
She looked up.
The Anathemata: a plague journal 801
Spider and D-t had turned off their lights and were looking, anxiously, beyond the second stanchion toward the dark hills of the safer
shore.
"\ guess," 1 told her, "you can give it to somebody else when you're
ready to be among the dried and crisp branches, trying to remember
it, get it down, thinking: I didn't leave them like that! \ didn't. It's not
real. It can't be. If it is then 1 am crazy. \ am too tired-wandering
among all these, and these streets where the burning, burning, leaves
the shattered and the toppling. Brick, no bridge because it takes so
long, leaving, 1 haven't leaving. That 1 was following down the dark
blood blots her glittering heel left on the blacktop. They slid into the
V of my two shadows on the moon and George lit along the I walk on
and kept. Leaving it. Twigs, leaves, bark bits along the shoulder, the
hissing hills and the smoke, the long country cut with summer and
no where to begin. In the direction, then, Broadway and train tracks,
limping in the in the all the dark blots till the rocks, running with
rusty water, following beside the broken mud gleaming on the ditch
edge, with the trees so over so I went into them and thought I could
wait here until she came, all naked up or might knowing what I couldn't, remember maybe if just one of them. He. In or on, I'm not qnite
where I go or what to go noW but I'll climb up on the and wonder
about Mexico if she, come, waiting.
This hand full of crumpled leaves.
It would be better than here. Just in the like that, if you can't remember any more if. I want to know but I can't see are you up there.
1 don't have a lot of strength now. The sky is stripped. \ am too weak
to write much. But \ still hear them walking in the trees; not speaking. Waiting here, away from the terrifying weaponry. out of the halls
of vapor and light, beyond holland and into the hills, I have come to
- San Francisco, Abaqii, Toronto,
Clarion, Milford, New Orleans,
Seattle, Vancouver, Middletown,
East Lansing, New York, London
January 1969/September 1973
FORTHCOMING FROM VINTAGE BOOKS
BABEL-17 AND EMPIRE STAR
by Samuel R. Delany
Hailed by The New York Times as "the most interesting
author of science fiction writing in English today,· Samuel R.
Delany is an insightful and dazzling talent. For the first time,
two of his science fiction classics, Babel-17 and Empire Star,
will be available in a single volume.
Delany's Nebula Award-winning Babel-17 centers around
Rydra Wong, a fam!,us poet bent on deciphering a secret language that is the key to the enemy's deadly force, a task that
requires her to travel with a splendidly improbable crew to the
site of the next attack. Along the way, however, she discovers
that her mission is being sabotaged by an enemy within.
Empire Star charts the intergalactic adventure of Comet Io, a
bored teen from the backwater world of Rhys, entrusted by a
dying alien to carry a message to a distant world. Gripping and
intelligent, Babel-17 and Empire Star are spellbinding testaments to Delany's vast and unique imaginative abilities.
Science FictionlO-375-70669-0
VINTAGE BOOKS
Available at your loCal bookstore, or call toll-free to order:
1-800-793-2665 (credit cards only).
Acclaim for Samuel R. Delany and Dhalgren
"Delany's kaleidoscopic prose-his powerful vision of a SOCiety trying
to come to terms with chaos-makes the whole journey worthwhile,"
-Gerald Jonas, Penthouse
"Superior intellect, the imaginative flourishes, the candor and precision of his vision, and the daring revelations of an extraordinarily
complex inner life .... There is no one like Samuel R. Delany in American letters." -Robert Fleming, Quarterly Black Review
·Webs within webs, circles within circles, [Delany's] imagination ...
creates a mirror of the oceanic density of our times, and leaves you
asking for more." -The Village Voice
"Delany has a fearsomely stocked intellect, and a wider range of experience than most writers can even imagine .. .. He is brilliant, driven,
prolific." -The Nation
"Dhalgren explores the nature of reality, the boundaries between the
true and the imagined, and the relationship between art and life. It
also examines the nature of race, American social structure, the power
of mythic patterns, the origins of violence, alternative sexual practices, and the connections between art and the criminal underground.
Altogether, Dhalgren is a unique and powerful literary masterpiece."
-Telluride Times';ournal
"Funky and sexual, elliptically told and complex in structure . . , . I've
read it three times, and will probably read it at least three more.'
-Frederic Pobl, Bookviews
Also 1ry Samuel R. Delany
Fiction
The Jewels of Aptor
!he Fall of the Towers:
Out of the Dead City
The Towers of Toron
City of a Thousand Suns
The Ballad of Beta·2
BabeJ.l7
Empue Star
The Einstein Intersection
Nova
Driflglass (stories)
Equinox (The Tides of Lust)
Trouble On Triton (TritOn)
Distant Stars (stOries)
Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand
Return to Neveryon:
Tales of Neve ryan
Nevery6na
Flight from Neveryon
Return to Neveryon (the Bridge of Lost Desire)
Driftglass/Starshards (collected stories)
They Fly at Ciron
The Mad Man
Hogg
Atlantis: Three Tales
Nonfiction
TheJewel·HingedJaw
Starboard Wine
The American Shore
Heavenly Breakfast
the Motion of Light in Water
Wag>ler/Artaud
The Straits of Messina
Silent Interviews
Longer Views
Bread &: 'Wine
Tiroes Square Red. Tiroes Square Blue
1984: Selected Letters
Shorter Views
Samuel R. Delany
Dhalgren
Samuel R. Delany was born and grew up in New York
City's Harlem. He is best known as the author of science
fiction aud fantasy novels, and his books have won both
Hugo and Nebula awards. He has also published several
books of nonfiction, including critical studies of literature,
a volume of memoirs, and the bestselling Times Square
Red, Times Square Blue. Delany is a professor of creative
writing and English at Temple University in Philadelphia. 